i 'm a neuroscientist , a professor at the university of california .
and over the past 35 years , i 've studied behavior on the basis of everything from genes through neurotransmitters , dopamine , things like that , all the way through circuit analysis .
so that 's what i normally do .
but then , for some reason , i got into something else , just recently .
and it all grew out of one of my colleagues asking me to analyze a bunch of brains of psychopathic killers .
and so this would be the typical talk i would give .
and the question is , " how do you end up with a psychopathic killer ? "
what i mean by psychopathic killer are these people , these types of people .
and so some of the brains that i 've studied are people you know about .
when i get the brains i do n't know what i 'm looking at .
it 's blind experiments . they also gave me normal people and everything .
so i 've looked at about 70 of these .
and what came up was a number of pieces of data .
so we look at these sorts of things theoretically , on the basis of genetics , and brain damage , and interaction with environment , and exactly how that machine works .
so we 're interested in exactly where in the brain , and what 's the most important part of the brain .
so we 've been looking at this : the interaction of genes , what 's called epigenetic effects , brain damage , and environment , and how these are tied together .
and how you end up with a psychopath , and a killer , depends on exactly when the damage occurs .
it 's really a very precisely timed thing .
you get different kinds of psychopaths .
so we 're going along with this . and here 's , just to give you the pattern .
the pattern is that those people , every one of them i looked at , who was a murderer , and was a serial killer , had damage to their orbital cortex , which is right above the eyes , the orbits , and also the interior part of the temporal lobe .
so there is the pattern that every one of them had , but they all were a little different too .
they had other sorts of brain damage .
a key thing is that the major violence genes , it 's called the mao - a gene .
and there is a variant of this gene that is in the normal population .
some of you have this . and it 's sex - linked .
it 's on the x chromosome . and so in this way you can only get it from your mother .
and in fact this is probably why mostly men , boys , are psychopathic killers , or are very aggressive .
because a daughter can get one x from the father , one x from the mother , it 's kind of diluted out .
but for a son , he can only get the x chromosome from his mother .
so this is how it 's passed from mother to son .
and it has to do with too much brain serotonin during development , which is kind of interesting because serotonin is supposed to make you calm and relaxed .
but if you have this gene , in utero your brain is bathed in this , so your whole brain becomes insensitive to serotonin , so it does n't work later on in life .
and i 'd given this one talk in israel , just this past year .
and it does have some consequences .
theoretically what this means is that in order to express this gene , in a violent way , very early on , before puberty , you have to be involved in something that is really traumatic -- not a little stress , not being spanked or something , but really seeing violence , or being involved in it , in 3d .
right ? that 's how the mirror neuron system works .
and so , if you have that gene , and you see a lot of violence in a certain situation , this is the recipe for disaster , absolute disaster .
and what i think might happen in these areas of the world , where we have constant violence , you end up having generations of kids that are seeing all this violence .
and if i was a young girl , somewhere in a violent area , you know , a 14 year old , and i want to find a mate , i 'd find some tough guy , right , to protect me .
well what the problem is this tends to concentrate these genes .
and now the boys and the girls get them .
so i think after several generations , and here is the idea , we really have a tinderbox .
so that was the idea .
but then my mother said to me , " i hear you 've been going around talking about psychopathic killers .
and you 're talking as if you come from a normal family . "
i said , " what the hell are you talking about ? "
she then told me about our own family tree .
now she blamed this on my father 's side , of course .
this was one of these cases , because she has no violence in her background , but my father did .
well she said , " there is good news and bad news .
one of your cousins is ezra cornell , founder of cornell university .
but the bad news is that your cousin is also lizzie borden .
now i said , " okay , so what ? we have lizzie . "
she goes , " no it gets worse , read this book . "
and here is this " killed strangely , " and it 's this historical book .
and the first murder of a mother by a son was my great - great - great - great - great - great - grandfather .
okay , so that 's the first case of matricide .
and that book is very interesting . because it 's about witch trials , and how people thought back then .
but it does n't stop there .
there were seven more men , on my father 's side , starting then , cornells , that were all murderers .
okay , now this gives one a little pause .
because my father himself , and my three uncles , in world war ii , were all conscientious objectors , all pussycats .
but every once in a while , like lizzie borden , like three times a century , and we 're kind of due .
so the moral of the story is : people in glass houses should n't throw stones .
and we had to take action . now our kids found out about it .
and they all seemed to be ok .
but our grandkids are going to be kind of concerned here .
so what we 've done is i 've started to do pet scans of everybody in the family .
we started to do pet scans , eegs and genetic analysis to see where the bad news is .
now the only person -- it turns out one son and one daughter , siblings , did n't get along and their patterns are exactly the same .
they have the same brain , and the same eeg .
and now they are close as can be .
but there 's gonna be bad news somewhere .
and we do n't know where it 's going to pop up .
so that 's my talk .
