i 'd like to take you to another world .
and i 'd like to share a 45 year - old love story with the poor , living on less than one dollar a day .
i went to a very elitist , snobbish , expensive education in india , and that almost destroyed me .
i was all set to be a diplomat , teacher , doctor -- all laid out .
then , i do n't look it , but i was the indian national squash champion for three years .
the whole world was laid out for me .
everything was at my feet .
i could do nothing wrong .
and then i thought out of curiosity i 'd like to go and live and work and just see what a village is like .
so in 1965 , i went to what was called the worst bihar famine in india , and i saw starvation , death , people dying of hunger , for the first time .
it changed my life .
i came back home , told my mother , " i 'd like to live and work in a village . "
mother went into a coma .
" what is this ?
the whole world is laid out for you , the best jobs are laid out for you , and you want to go and work in a village ?
i mean , is there something wrong with you ? "
i said , " no , i 've got the best eduction .
it made me think .
and i wanted to give something back in my own way . "
" what do you want to do in a village ?
no job , no money , no security , no prospect . "
i said , " i want to live and dig wells for five years . "
" dig wells for five years ?
you went to the most expensive school and college in india , and you want to dig wells for five years ? "
she did n't speak to me for a very long time , because she thought i 'd let my family down .
but then , i was exposed to the most extraordinary knowledge and skills that very poor people have , which are never brought into the mainstream -- which is never identified , respected , applied on a large scale .
and i thought i 'd start a barefoot college -- college only for the poor .
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college .
i went to this village for the first time .
elders came to me and said , " are you running from the police ? "
i said , " no. "
" you failed in your exam ? "
i said , " no. "
" you did n't get a government job ? " i said , " no. "
" what are you doing here ?
why are you here ?
the education system in india makes you look at paris and new delhi and zurich ; what are you doing in this village ?
is there something wrong with you you 're not telling us ? "
i said , " no , i want to actually start a college only for the poor .
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college . "
so the elders gave me some very sound and profound advice .
they said , " please , do n't bring anyone with a degree and qualification into your college . "
so it 's the only college in india where , if you should have a ph.d. or a master 's , you are disqualified to come .
you have to be a cop - out or a wash - out or a dropout to come to our college .
you have to work with your hands .
you have to have a dignity of labor .
you have to show that you have a skill that you can offer to the community and provide a service to the community .
so we started the barefoot college , and we redefined professionalism .
who is a professional ?
a professional is someone who has a combination of competence , confidence and belief .
a water diviner is a professional .
a traditional midwife is a professional .
a traditional bone setter is a professional .
these are professionals all over the world .
you find them in any inaccessible village around the world .
and we thought that these people should come into the mainstream and show that the knowledge and skills that they have is universal .
it needs to be used , needs to be applied , needs to be shown to the world outside -- that these knowledge and skills are relevant even today .
so the college works following the lifestyle and workstyle of mahatma gandhi .
you eat on the floor , you sleep on the floor , you work on the floor .
there are no contracts , no written contracts .
you can stay with me for 20 years , go tomorrow .
and no one can get more than $ 100 a month .
you come for the money , you do n't come to barefoot college .
you come for the work and the challenge , you 'll come to the barefoot college .
that is where we want you to try crazy ideas .
whatever idea you have , come and try it .
it does n't matter if you fail .
battered , bruised , you start again .
it 's the only college where the teacher is the learner and the learner is the teacher .
and it 's the only college where we do n't give a certificate .
you are certified by the community you serve .
you do n't need a paper to hang on the wall to show that you are an engineer .
so when i said that , they said , " well show us what is possible . what are you doing ?
this is all mumbo - jumbo if you ca n't show it on the ground . "
so we built the first barefoot college in 1986 .
it was built by 12 barefoot architects who ca n't read and write , built on $ 1.50 a sq. ft.
150 people lived there , worked there .
they got the aga khan award for architecture in 2002 .
but then they suspected , they thought there was an architect behind it .
i said , " yes , they made the blueprints , but the barefoot architects actually constructed the college . "
we are the only ones who actually returned the award for $ 50,000 , because they did n't believe us , and we thought that they were actually casting aspersions on the barefoot architects of tilonia .
i asked a forester -- high - powered , paper - qualified expert -- i said , " what can you build in this place ? "
he had one look at the soil and said , " forget it . no way .
not even worth it .
no water , rocky soil . "
i was in a bit of a spot .
and i said , " okay , i 'll go to the old man in village and say , ' what should i grow in this spot ? ' " he looked quietly at me and said , " you build this , you build this , you put this , and it 'll work . "
this is what it looks like today .
went to the roof , and all the women said , " clear out .
the men should clear out because we do n't want to share this technology with the men .
this is waterproofing the roof . "
it is a bit of jaggery , a bit of urens and a bit of other things i do n't know .
but it actually does n't leak .
since 1986 , it has n't leaked .
this technology , the women will not share with the men .
it 's the only college which is fully solar - electrified .
all the power comes from the sun.
45 kilowatts of panels on the roof .
and everything works off the sun for the next 25 years .
so long as the sun shines , we 'll have no problem with power .
but the beauty is that is was installed by a priest , a hindu priest , who 's only done eight years of primary schooling -- never been to school , never been to college .
he knows more about solar than anyone i know anywhere in the world guaranteed .
food , if you come to the barefoot college , is solar cooked .
but the people who fabricated that solar cooker are women , illiterate women , who actually fabricate the most sophisticated solar cooker .
it 's a parabolic scheffler solar cooker .
unfortunately , they 're almost half german , they 're so precise .
you 'll never find indian women so precise .
absolutely to the last inch , they can make that cooker .
and we have 60 meals twice a day we have a dentist -- she 's a grandmother , illiterate , who 's a dentist .
she actually looks after the teeth of 7,000 children .
barefoot technology : this was 1986 -- no engineer , no architect thought of it -- but we are collecting rainwater from the roofs .
very little water is wasted .
all the roofs are connected underground to a 400,000 liter tank , and no water is wasted .
if we have four years of drought , we still have water on the campus , because we collect rainwater .
60 percent of children do n't go to school , because they have to look after animals -- sheep , goats -- domestic chores .
so we thought of starting a school at night for the children .
because the night schools of tilonia , over 75,000 children have gone through these night schools .
because it 's for the convenience of the child ; it 's not for the convenience of the teacher .
and what do we teach in these schools ?
democracy , citizenship , how you should measure your land , what you should do if you 're arrested , what you should do if your animal is sick .
this is what we teach in the night schools .
but all the schools are solar - lit .
every five years we have an election .
between six to 14 year - old children participate in a democratic process , and they elect a prime minister .
the prime minister is 12 years old .
she looks after 20 goats in the morning , but she 's prime minister in the evening .
she has a cabinet , a minister of education , a minister for energy , a minister for health .
and they actually monitor and supervise 150 schools for 7,000 children .
she got the world 's children 's prize five years ago , and she went to sweden .
first time ever going out of her village .
never seen sweden .
was n't dazzled at all by what was happening .
and the queen of sweden , who 's there , turned to me and said , " can you ask this child where she got her confidence from ?
she 's only 12 years old , and she 's not dazzled by anything . "
and the girl , who 's on her left , turned to me and looked at the queen straight in the eye and said , " please tell her i 'm the prime minister . "
where the percentage of illiteracy is very high , we use puppetry .
puppets is the way we communicate .
you have jokhim chacha who is 300 years old .
he is my psychoanalyst . he is my teacher .
he 's my doctor . he 's my lawyer .
he 's my donor .
he actually raises money , solves my disputes .
he solves my problems in the village .
if there 's tension in the village , if attendance at the schools goes down and there 's a friction between the teacher and the parent , the puppet calls the teacher and the parent in front of the whole village and says , " shake hands .
the attendance must not drop . "
are made out of recycled world bank reports .
so this decentralized , demystified approach of solar - electrifying villages , we 've covered all over india from ladakh up to bhutan -- all solar - electrified villages by people who have been trained .
and we went to ladakh , and we asked this woman -- this , at minus 40 , you have to come out of the roof , because there 's no place , it was all snowed up on both sides -- and we asked this woman , " what was the benefit you had from solar electricity ? "
and she thought for a minute and said , " it 's the first time i can see my husband 's face in winter . "
went to afghanistan .
one lesson we learned in india was men are untrainable .
men are restless , men are ambitious , men are compulsively mobile , and they all want a certificate .
all across the globe , you have this tendency of men wanting a certificate .
why ? because they want to leave the village and go to a city , looking for a job .
so we came up with a great solution : train grandmothers .
what 's the best way of communicating in the world today ?
television ? no.
telegraph ? no.
telephone ? no.
tell a woman .
so we went to afghanistan for the first time , and we picked three women and said , " we want to take them to india . "
they said , " impossible . they do n't even go out of their rooms , and you want to take them to india . "
i said , " i 'll make a concession . i 'll take the husbands along as well . "
so i took the husbands along .
of course , the women were much more intelligent than the men .
in six months , how do we train these women ?
sign language .
you do n't choose the written word .
you do n't choose the spoken word .
you use sign language .
and in six months they can become solar engineers .
they go back and solar - electrify their own village .
this woman went back and solar - electrified the first village , set up a workshop -- the first village ever to be solar - electrified in afghanistan [ was ] by the three women .
this woman is an extraordinary grandmother .
55 years old , and she 's solar - electrified 200 houses for me in afghanistan .
and they have n't collapsed .
she actually went and spoke to an engineering department in afghanistan and told the head of the department the difference between ac and dc .
he did n't know .
those three women have trained 27 more women and solar - electrified 100 villages in afghanistan .
we went to africa , and we did the same thing .
all these women sitting at one table from eight , nine countries , all chatting to each other , not understanding a word , because they 're all speaking a different language .
but their body language is great .
they 're speaking to each other and actually becoming solar engineers .
i went to sierra leone , and there was this minister driving down in the dead of night -- comes across this village .
comes back , goes into the village , says , " well what 's the story ? "
they said , " these two grandmothers ... " " grandmothers ? " the minister could n't believe what was happening .
" where did they go ? " " went to india and back . "
went straight to the president .
he said , " do you know there 's a solar - electrified village in sierra leone ? "
he said , " no. " half the cabinet went to see the grandmothers the next day .
" what 's the story . "
so he summoned me and said , " can you train me 150 grandmothers ? "
i said , " i ca n't , mr. president .
but they will . the grandmothers will . "
so he built me the first barefoot training center in sierra leone .
and 150 grandmothers have been trained in sierra leone .
gambia : we went to select a grandmother in gambia .
went to this village .
i knew which woman i would like to take .
the community got together and said , " take these two women . "
i said , " no , i want to take this woman . "
they said , " why ? she does n't know the language . you do n't know her . "
i said , " i like the body language . i like the way she speaks . "
" difficult husband ; not possible . "
called the husband , the husband came , swaggering , politician , mobile in his hand . " not possible . "
" why not ? " " the woman , look how beautiful she is . "
i said , " yeah , she is very beautiful . "
" what happens if she runs off with an indian man ? "
that was his biggest fear .
i said , " she 'll be happy . she 'll ring you up on the mobile . "
she went like a grandmother and came back like a tiger .
she walked out of the plane and spoke to the whole press as if she was a veteran .
she handled the national press , and she was a star .
and when i went back six months later , i said , " where 's your husband ? "
" oh , somewhere . it does n't matter . "
success story .
i 'll just wind up by saying that i think you do n't have to look for solutions outside .
look for solutions within .
and listen to people . they have the solutions in front of you .
they 're all over the world .
do n't even worry .
do n't listen to the world bank , listen to the people on the ground .
they have all the solutions in the world .
i 'll end with a quotation by mahatma gandhi .
" first they ignore you , then they laugh at you , then they fight you , and then you win . "
thank you .
