as a magician , i 'm always interested in performances that incorporate elements of illusion .
and one of the most remarkable was the tanagra theater , which was popular in the early part of the 20th century .
it used mirrors to create the illusion of tiny people performing on a miniature stage . now , i wo n't use mirrors , but this is my digital tribute to the tanagra theater .
so let the story begin .
on a dark and stormy night -- really ! -- it was the 10th of july , 1856 .
lightning lit the sky , and a baby was born .
his name was nikola , nikola tesla .
now the baby grew into a very smart guy .
let me show you .
tesla , what is 236 multiplied by 501 ?
nikola tesla : the result is 118,236 .
marco tempest : now tesla 's brain worked in the most extraordinary way .
when a word was mentioned , an image of it instantly appeared in his mind .
tree . chair . girl .
they were hallucinations , which vanished the moment he touched them .
probably a form of synesthesia .
but it was something he later turned to his advantage .
where other scientists would play in their laboratory , tesla created his inventions in his mind .
nt : to my delight , i discovered i could visualize my inventions with the greatest facility .
mt : and when they worked in the vivid playground of his imagination , he would build them in his workshop .
nt : i needed no models , drawings or experiments .
i could picture them as real in my mind , and there i run it , test it and improve it .
only then do i construct it .
mt : his great idea was alternating current .
but how could he convince the public that the millions of volts required to make it work were safe ?
to sell his idea , he became a showman .
nt : we are at the dawn of a new age , the age of electricity .
i have been able , through careful invention , to transmit , with the mere flick of a switch , electricity across the ether .
it is the magic of science .
tesla has over 700 patents to his name : radio , wireless telegraphy , remote control , robotics .
he even photographed the bones of the human body .
but the high point was the realization of a childhood dream : harnessing the raging powers of niagara falls , and bringing light to the city .
but tesla 's success did n't last .
nt : i had bigger ideas .
illuminating the city was only the beginning .
a world telegraphy center -- imagine news , messages , sounds , images delivered to any point in the world instantly and wirelessly .
mt : it 's a great idea ; it was a huge project . expensive , too .
nt : they would n't give me the money .
mt : well , maybe you should n't have told them it could be used to contact other planets .
nt : yes , that was a big mistake .
mt : tesla 's career as an inventor never recovered .
he became a recluse .
dodged by death , he spent much of his time in his suite at the waldorf - astoria .
nt : everything i did , i did for mankind , for a world where there would be no humiliation of the poor by the violence of the rich , where products of intellect , science and art will serve society for the betterment and beautification of life .
mt : nikola tesla died on the 7th of january , 1943 .
his final resting place is a golden globe that contains his ashes at the nikola tesla museum in belgrade .
his legacy is with us still .
tesla became the man who lit the world , but this was only the beginning .
tesla 's insight was profound .
nt : tell me , what will man do when the forests disappear , and the coal deposits are exhausted ?
mt : tesla thought he had the answer .
we are still asking the question .
thank you .
