the problem that i want to talk with you about is really the problem of : how does one supply healthcare in a world in which cost is everything ?
how do you do that ?
and the basic paradigm we want to suggest to you , i want to suggest to you , is one in which you say that in order to treat disease you have to first know what you 're treating -- that 's diagnostics -- and then you have to do something .
so , the program that we 're involved in is something which we call diagnostics for all , or zero - cost diagnostics .
how do you provide medically relevant information at as close as possible to zero cost ? how do you do it ?
let me just give you two examples .
the rigors of military medicine are not so dissimilar from the third world -- poor resources , a rigorous environment , a series of problems in lightweight , and things of this kind -- and also not so different from the home healthcare and diagnostic system world .
so , the technology that i want to talk about is for the third world , for the developing world , but it has , i think , much broader application , because information is so important in the healthcare system .
so , you see two examples here .
one is a lab that is actually a fairly high - end laboratory in africa .
the second is basically an entrepreneur who is set up and doing who - knows - what in a table in a market .
i do n't know what kind of healthcare is delivered there .
but it 's not really what is probably most efficient .
what is our approach ?
and the way in which one typically approaches a problem of lowering cost , starting from the perspective of the united states , is to take our solution , and then to try to cut cost out of it .
no matter how you do that , you 're not going to start with a 100,000 - dollar instrument and bring it down to no - cost . it is n't going to work .
so , the approach that we took was the other way around .
to ask , " what is the cheapest possible stuff that you could make a diagnostic system out of , and get useful information , add function ? " and what we 've chosen is paper .
what you see here is a prototypic device .
it 's about a centimeter on the side .
it 's about the size of a fingernail .
the lines around the edges are a polymer .
it 's made of paper and paper , of course , wicks fluid , as you know , paper , cloth -- drop wine on the tablecloth , and the wine wicks all over everything .
put it on your shirt , it ruins the shirt .
that 's what a hydrophilic surface does .
so , in this device the idea is that you drip the bottom end of it in a drop of , in this case , urine .
the fluid wicks its way into those chambers at the top .
the brown color indicates the amount of glucose in the urine , the blue color indicates the amount of protein in the urine .
and the combination of those two is a first order shot at a number of useful things that you want .
so , this is an example of a device made from a simple piece of paper .
now , how simple can you make the production ?
why do we choose paper ?
there 's an example of the same thing on a finger , showing you basically what it looks like .
one reason for using paper is that it 's everywhere .
we have made these kinds of devices using napkins and toilet paper and wraps , and all kinds of stuff .
so , the production capability is there .
the second is , you can put lots and lots of tests in a very small place .
i 'll show you in a moment that the stack of paper there would probably hold something like 100,000 tests , something of that kind .
and then finally , a point that you do n't think of so much in developed world medicine : it eliminates sharps .
and what sharps means is needles , things that stick .
if you 've taken a sample of someone 's blood and the someone might have hepatitis c , you do n't want to make a mistake and stick it in you .
it just -- you do n't want to do that .
so , how do you dispose of that ? it 's a problem everywhere .
and here you simply burn it .
so , it 's a sort of a practical approach to starting on things .
now , you say , " if paper is a good idea , other people have surely thought of it . "
and the answer is , of course , yes .
those half of you , roughly , who are women , at some point may have had a pregnancy test .
and the most common of these is in a device that looks like the thing on the left .
it 's something called a lateral flow immunoassay .
in that particular test , urine either , containing a hormone called hcg , does or does not flow across a piece of paper .
and there are two bars . one bar indicates that the test is working , and if the second bar shows up , you 're pregnant .
this is a terrific kind of test in a binary world , and the nice thing about pregnancy is either you are pregnant or you 're not pregnant .
you 're not partially pregnant or thinking about being pregnant or something of that sort .
so , it works very well there , but it does n't work very well when you need more quantitative information .
there are also dipsticks , but if you look at the dipsticks , they 're for another kind of urine analysis .
there are an awful lot of colors and things like that .
what do you actually do about that in a difficult circumstance ?
so , the approach that we started with is to ask : is it really practical to make things of this sort ?
and that problem is now , in a purely engineering way , solved .
and the procedure that we have is simply to start with paper .
you run it through a new kind of printer called a wax printer .
the wax printer does what looks like printing .
it is printing . you put that on , you warm it a little bit , the wax prints through so it absorbs into the paper , and you end up with the device that you want .
the printers cost 800 bucks now .
they 'll make , we estimate that if you were to run them 24 hours a day they 'd make about 10 million tests a year .
so , it 's a solved problem , that particular problem is solved .
and there is an example of the kind of thing that you see .
that 's on a piece of 8 by 12 paper .
that takes about two seconds to make .
and so i regard that as done .
there is a very important issue here , which is that because it 's a printer , a color printer , it prints colors . that 's what color printers do .
i 'll show you in a moment , that 's actually quite useful .
now , the next question that you would like to ask is : what would you like to measure ? what would you like to analyze ?
and the thing which you 'd most like to analyze , we 're a fair distance from .
it 's what 's called " fever of undiagnosed origin . "
someone comes into the clinic , they have a fever , they feel bad . what do they have ?
do they have t.b. ? do they have aids ?
do they have a common cold ?
the triage problem . that 's a hard problem for reasons that i wo n't go through .
there are an awful lot of things that you 'd like to distinguish among .
but then there are a series of things : aids , hepatitis , malaria , tb , others and simpler ones , such as guidance of treatment .
now even that 's more complicated than you think .
a friend of mine works in transcultural psychiatry , and he is interested in the question of why people do and do n't take their meds .
so , dapsone , or something like that , you have to take it for a while .
he has a wonderful story of talking to a villager in india and saying , " have you taken your dapsone ? " " yes . "
" have you taken it every day ? " " yes . "
" have you taken if for a month ? " " yes . "
what the guy actually meant was that he 'd fed a 30 - day dose of dapsone to his dog , that morning .
he was telling the truth . because in a different culture , the dog is a surrogate for you , you know , " today , " " this month , " " since the rainy season " -- there are lots of opportunities for misunderstanding , and so an issue here is to , in some cases , to figure out how to deal with matters that seem uninteresting , like compliance .
now , take a look at what a typical test looks like .
prick a finger , you get some blood , about 50 microliters .
that 's about all you 're going to get , because you ca n't use the usual sort of systems .
you ca n't manipulate it very well , although i 'll show something about that in a moment .
so , you take the drop of blood , no further manipulations , you put it on a little device , the device filters out the blood cells , lets the serum go through , and you get a series of colors down in the bottom there .
and the colors indicate " disease " or " normal . "
but even that 's complicated , because to you , to me , colors might indicate " normal , " but , after all , we 're all suffering from probably an excess of education .
what you do about something which requires quantitative analysis ?
and so the solution that we and many other people are thinking about there , and at this point there is a dramatic flourish , and out comes the universal solution to everything these days , which is a cell phone . in this particular case , a camera phone .
they 're everywhere , six billion a month in india .
and the idea is that what one does , is to take the device , you dip it , you develop the color , you take a picture , the picture goes to a central laboratory .
you do n't have to send out a doctor , you send out somebody who can just take the sample , and in the clinic either a doctor , or ideally a computer in this case , does the analysis .
turns out to work actually quite well , particularly when your color printer has printed the color bars that indicate how things work .
so , my view of the health care worker of the future is not a doctor , but is an 18 - year - old , otherwise unemployed , who has two things : he has a backpack full of these tests , and a lancet to occasionally take a blood sample , and an ak - 47 .
and these are the things that get him through his day .
there 's another very interesting connection here , and that is that what one wants to do is to pass through useful information over what is generally a pretty awful telephone system .
it turns out there 's an enormous amount of information already available on that subject , which is the mars rover problem .
how do you get back an accurate view of the color on mars if you have a really terrible bandwidth to do it with ?
and the answer is not complicated but it 's one which i do n't want to go through here , other than to say that the communication systems for doing this are really pretty well understood .
also , a fact which you may not know is that the compute capability of this thing is not so different from the compute capability of your desktop computer .
this is a fantastic device which is only beginning to be tapped .
i do n't know whether the idea of one computer , one child makes any sense . here 's the computer of the future , because this screen is already there and they 're ubiquitous .
all right now let me show you just a little bit about advanced devices .
and we 'll start by posing a little problem .
what you see here is another centimeter - sized device , and the different colors are different colors of dye .
and you notice something which might strike you as a little bit interesting , which is the yellow seems to disappear , get through the blue , and then get through the red .
how does that happen ? how do you make something flow through something ?
and , of course the answer is , " you do n't . "
you make it flow under and over .
but now the question is : how do you make it flow under and over in a piece of paper ?
the answer is that what you do , and the details are not terribly important here , is to make something more elaborate : you take several different layers of paper , each one containing its own little fluid system , and you separate them by pieces of , literally , double - sided carpet tape , the stuff you use to stick the carpets onto the floor .
and the fluid will flow from one layer into the next .
it distributes itself , flows through further holes , distributes itself .
and what you see , at the lower right - hand side there , is a sample in which a single sample of blood has been put on the top , and it has gone through and distributed itself into these 16 holes on the bottom , in a piece of paper -- basically it looks like a chip , two pieces of paper thick .
and in this particular case we were just interested in the replicability of that .
but that is , in principle , the way you solve the " fever of unexplained origin " problem , because each one of those spots then becomes a test for a particular set of markers of disease , and this will work in due course .
here is an example of a slightly more complicated device .
there 's the chip .
you dip in a corner . the fluid goes into the center .
it distributes itself out into these various wells or holes , and turns color , and all done with paper and carpet tape .
so , i think it 's as low - cost as we 're likely to be able to come up and make things .
now , i have one last , two last little stories to tell you , in finishing off this business .
this is one : one of the things that one does occasionally need to do is to separate blood cells from serum .
and the question was , here we do it by taking a sample , we put it in a centrifuge , we spin it , and you get blood cells out . terrific .
what happens if you do n't have an electricity , and a centrifuge , and whatever ?
and we thought for a while of how you might do this and the way , in fact , you do it is what 's shown here .
you get an eggbeater , which is everywhere , and you saw off a blade , and then you take tubing , and you stick it on that . you put the blood in , you spin it -- somebody sits there and spins it .
it works really , really well .
and we sat down , we did the physics of eggbeaters and self - aligning tubes and all the rest of that kind of thing , sent it off to a journal .
we were very proud of this , particularly the title , which was " eggbeater as centrifuge . "
and we sent it off , and by return mail it came back .
i called up the editor and i said , " what 's going on ? how is this possible ? "
the editor said , with enormous disdain , " i read this .
and we 're not going to publish it , because we only publish science . "
and it 's an important issue because it means that we have to , as a society , think about what we value .
and if it 's just papers and phys . rev. letters , we 've got a problem .
here is another example of something which is -- this is a little spectrophotometer .
it measures the absorption of light in a sample the neat thing about this is , you have light source that flickers on and off at about 1,000 hertz , another light source that detects that light at 1,000 hertz , and so you can run this system in broad daylight .
it performs about equivalently to a system that 's in the order of 100,000 dollars .
it costs 50 dollars . we can probably make it for 50 cents , if we put our mind to it .
why does n't somebody do it ? and the answer is , " how do you make a profit in a capitalist system , doing that ? "
interesting problem .
so , let me finish by saying that we 've thought about this as a kind of engineering problem .
and we 've asked : what is the scientific unifying idea here ?
and we 've decided that we should think about this not so much in terms of cost , but in terms of simplicity .
simplicity is a neat word . and you 've got to think about what simplicity means .
i know what it is but i do n't actually know what it means .
so , i actually was interested enough in this to put together several groups of people .
and the most recent involved a couple of people at mit , one of them being an exceptionally bright kid who is one of the very few people i would think of who 's an authentic genius .
we all struggled for an entire day to think about simplicity .
and i want to give you the answer of this deep scientific thought .
so , in a sense , you get what you pay for .
thank you very much .
