i decided when i was asked to do this that what i really wanted to talk about was my friend richard feynman .
i was one of the fortunate few that really did get to know him and enjoyed his presence .
and i 'm going to tell you the richard feynman that i knew .
i 'm sure there are other people here who could tell you about the richard feynman they knew , and it would probably be a different richard feynman .
richard feynman was a very complex man .
he was a man of many , many parts .
he was , of course , foremost , a very , very , very great scientist .
he was an actor . you saw him act .
i also had the good fortune to be in those lectures , up in the balcony .
they were fantastic .
he was a philosopher ;
he was a drum player ;
he was a teacher par excellence .
richard feynman was also a showman , an enormous showman .
he was brash , irreverent -- he was full of macho , a kind of macho one - upmanship .
he loved intellectual battle .
he had a gargantuan ego .
but the man had somehow a lot of room at the bottom .
and what i mean by that is a lot of room , in my case -- i ca n't speak for anybody else -- but in my case , a lot of room for another big ego .
well , not as big as his , but fairly big .
i always felt good with dick feynman .
it was always fun to be with him .
he always made me feel smart .
how can somebody like that make you feel smart ?
somehow he did .
he made me feel smart . he made me feel he was smart .
he made me feel we were both smart , and the two of us could solve any problem whatever .
and in fact , we did sometimes do physics together .
we never published a paper together , but we did have a lot of fun .
he loved to win .
with these little macho games we would sometimes play -- and he did n't only play them with me , he played them with all sorts of people -- he would almost always win .
but when he did n't win , when he lost , he would laugh and seem to have just as much fun as if he had won .
i remember once he told me a story about a joke that the students played on him .
they took him -- i think it was for his birthday -- they took him for lunch .
they took him for lunch to a sandwich place in pasadena .
it may still exist ; i do n't know .
celebrity sandwiches was their thing .
you could get a marilyn monroe sandwich .
you could get a humphrey bogart sandwich .
the students went there in advance , and they arranged that they would all order feynman sandwiches .
one after another , they came in and ordered feynman sandwiches .
feynman loved this story .
he told me this story , and he was really happy and laughing .
when he finished the story , i said to him , " dick , i wonder what would be the difference between a feynman sandwich and a susskind sandwich . " and without skipping a beat at all , he said , " well , they 'd be about the same .
the only difference is a susskind sandwich would have a lot more ham , " ham , as in bad actor .
well , i happened to have been very quick that day , and i said , " yeah , but a lot less baloney . " the truth of the matter is that a feynman sandwich had a load of ham , but absolutely no baloney .
what feynman hated worse than anything else was intellectual pretense -- phoniness , false sophistication , jargon .
i remember sometime during the '80s , the mid - '80s , dick and i and sidney coleman would meet a couple of times up in san francisco at some very rich guy 's house -- up in san francisco for dinner .
and the last time the rich guy invited us , he also invited a couple of philosophers .
these guys were philosophers of mind .
their specialty was the philosophy of consciousness .
and they were full of all kinds of jargon .
i 'm trying to remember the words -- " monism , " " dualism , " categories all over the place .
i did n't know what those things meant , neither did dick -- neither did sydney for that matter .
and what did we talk about ?
well , what do you talk about when you talk about minds ?
one thing , there 's one obvious thing to talk about -- can a machine become a mind ?
can you build a machine that thinks like a human being , that is conscious ?
we sat around and we talked about this -- we of course never resolved it .
but the trouble with the philosophers is that they were philosophizing when they should have been science - iphizing .
it 's a scientific question after all .
and this was a very , very dangerous thing to do around dick feynman .
feynman let them have it -- both barrels , right between the eyes .
it was brutal ; it was funny -- ooh , it was funny .
but it was really brutal .
he really popped their balloon .
but the amazing thing was -- feynman had to leave a little early .
he was n't feeling too well , so he left a little bit early .
and sidney and i were left there with the two philosophers .
and the amazing thing is these guys were flying .
they were so happy .
they had met the great man ; they had been instructed by the great man ; they had an enormous amount of fun having their faces shoved in the mud , and it was something special .
i realized there was something just extraordinary about feynman , even when he did what he did .
dick , he was my friend . i did call him dick .
dick and i had a certain , a little bit of a rapport .
i think it may have been a special rapport that he and i had .
we liked each other ; we liked the same kind of things .
i also liked the kind of intellectual macho games .
sometimes i would win , mostly he would win , but we both enjoyed them .
and dick became convinced at some point that he and i had some kind of similarity of personality .
i do n't think he was right .
i think the only point of similarity between us is we both like to talk about ourselves .
but he was convinced of this .
and he was curious .
the man was incredibly curious .
and he wanted to understand what it was and why it was that there was this funny connection .
and one day we were walking . we were in france .
we were in la zouche .
we were up in the mountains , 1976 .
we were up in the mountains , and feynman said to me , he said , " leonardo . " the reason he called me leonardo is because we were in europe and he was practicing his french .
and he said , " leonardo , were you closer to your mother or to you father when you were a kid ? " and i said , " well , my real hero was my father .
he was a working man , had a fifth grade education .
he was a master mechanic , and he taught me how to use tools .
he taught me all sorts of things about mechanical things .
he even taught me the pythagorean theorem .
he did n't call it the hypotenuse , he called it the shortcut distance . " and feynman 's eyes just opened up .
he went off like a light bulb .
and he said he had had basically exactly the same relationship with his father .
in fact , he had been convinced at one time that , to be a good physicist , that it was very important to have had that kind of relationship with your father .
i apologize for the sexist conversation here , but this is the way it really happened .
he said that he had been absolutely convinced that this was necessary -- the necessary part of the growing up of a young physicist .
being dick , he , of course , wanted to check this .
he wanted to go out and do an experiment .
so , well he did .
he went out and did an experiment .
he asked all his friends that he thought were good physicists , " was it your mom or your pop that influenced you ? " and to a man -- they were all men -- to a man , every single one of them said , " my mother . " there went that theory down the trashcan of history .
but he was very excited that he had finally met somebody who had the same experience with my father as he had with his father .
and for some time , he was convinced this was the reason we got along so well .
i do n't know . maybe . who knows ?
but let me tell you a little bit about feynman the physicist .
feynman 's style -- no , style is not the right word .
style makes you think of the bow tie he might have worn or the suit he was wearing .
there 's something much deeper than that , but i ca n't think of another word for it .
feynman 's scientific style was always to look for the simplest , most elementary solution to a problem that was possible .
if it was n't possible , you had to use something fancier .
but no doubt part of this was his great joy and pleasure in showing people that he could think more simply than they could .
but he also deeply believed , he truly believed , that if you could n't explain something simply you did n't understand it .
in the 1950s , people were trying to figure out how superfluid helium worked .
there was a theory .
it was due to a russian mathematical physicist , and it was a complicated theory .
i 'll tell you what that theory was soon enough .
it was a terribly complicated theory full of very difficult integrals and formulas and mathematics and so forth .
and it sort of worked , but it did n't work very well .
the only way it worked is when the helium atoms were very , very far apart .
the helium atoms had to be very far apart .
and unfortunately , the helium atoms in liquid helium are right on top of each other .
feynman decided , as a sort of amateur helium physicist , that he would try to figure it out .
he had an idea , a very clear idea .
he would try to figure out what the quantum wave function of this huge number of atoms looked like .
he would try to visualize it , guided by a small number of simple principles .
the small number of simple principles were very , very simple .
the first one was that when helium atoms touch each other , they repel .
the implication of that is that the wave function has to go to zero , it has to vanish when the helium atoms touch each other .
the other fact is that the ground state , the lowest energy state of a quantum system , the wave function is always very smooth -- has the minimum number of wiggles .
so he sat down -- and i imagine he had nothing more than a simple piece of paper and a pencil -- and he tried to write down , and did write down , the simplest function that he could think of which had the boundary conditions that the wave function vanish when things touch and is smooth in between .
he wrote down a simple thing .
it was so simple , in fact , that i suspect a really smart high school student , who did n't even have calculus , could understand what he wrote down .
the thing was that that simple thing that he wrote down explained everything that was known at the time about liquid helium and then some .
i 've always wondered whether the professionals , the real professional helium physicists , were just a little bit embarrassed by this .
they had their super - powerful technique , and they could n't do as well .
incidentally , i 'll tell you what that super - powerful technique was .
it was the technique of feynman diagrams .
he did it again in 1968 .
in 1968 , in my own university -- i was n't there at the time -- but in 1968 , they were exploring the structure of the proton .
the proton is obviously made of a whole bunch of little particles .
this was more or less known .
and the way to analyze it was , of course , feynman diagrams .
that 's what feynman diagrams were constructed for -- to understand particles .
the experiments that were going on were very simple .
you simply take the proton , and you hit it really sharply with an electron .
this was the thing the feynman diagrams were for .
the only problem was that feynman diagrams are complicated .
they 're difficult integrals .
if you could do all of them , you would have a very precise theory .
but you could n't ; they were just too complicated .
people were trying to do them .
you could do a one loop diagram . do n't worry about one loop .
one loop , two loops -- maybe you could do a three loop diagram , but beyond that , you could n't do anything .
feynman said , " forget all of that .
just think of the proton as an assemblage of little particles -- a swarm of little particles . " he called them partons . he called them partons .
he said , " just think of it as a swarm of partons moving real fast . " because they 're moving real fast , relativity says the internal motions go very slow .
the electron hits it suddenly .
it 's like taking a very sudden snapshot of the proton .
what do you see ?
you see a frozen bunch of partons .
they do n't move , and because they do n't move during the course of the experiment , you do n't have to worry about how they 're moving .
you do n't have to worry about the forces between them .
you just get to think of it as a population of frozen partons .
this was the key to analyzing these experiments .
extremely effective , it really did -- somebody said the word revolution is a bad word .
i suppose it is , so i wo n't say revolution -- but it certainly evolved very , very deeply our understanding of the proton , and of particles beyond that .
well , i had some more that i was going to tell you about my connection with feynman , what he was like , but i see i have exactly half a minute .
so i think i 'll just finish up by saying i actually do n't think feynman would have liked this event .
i think he would have said , " i do n't need this . " but how should we honor feynman ?
how should we really honor feynman ?
i think the answer is we should honor feynman by getting as much baloney out of our own sandwiches as we can .
thank you .
