i 'll just take you to bangladesh for a minute .
before i tell that story , we should ask ourselves the question : why does poverty exist ?
i mean , there is plenty of knowledge and scientific breakthroughs .
we all live in the same planet , but there 's still a great deal of poverty in the world .
and i think -- so i want to throw a perspective that i have , so that we can assess this project , or any other project , for that matter , to see whether it 's contributing or -- contributing to poverty or trying to alleviate it .
rich countries have been sending aid to poor countries for the last 60 years .
and by and large , this has failed . and you can see this book , written by someone who worked in the world bank for 20 years , and he finds economic growth in this country to be elusive .
by and large , it did not work .
so the question is , why is that ?
in my mind , there is something to learn from the history of europe .
i mean , even here , yesterday i was walking across the street , and they showed three bishops were executed 500 years ago , right across the street from here .
so my point is , there 's a lot of struggle has gone in europe , where citizens were empowered by technologies .
and they demanded authorities from -- to come down from their high horses .
and in the end , there 's better bargaining between the authorities and citizens , and democracies , capitalism -- everything else flourished .
and so you can see , the real process of -- and this is backed up by this 500 - page book -- that the authorities came down and citizens got up .
but if you look , if you have that perspective , then you can see what happened in the last 60 years .
aid actually did the opposite .
it empowered authorities ,
and , as a result , marginalized citizens .
the authorities did not have the reason to make economic growth happen so that they could tax people and make more money for to run their business .
because they were getting it from abroad .
and in fact , if you see oil - rich countries , where citizens are not yet empowered , the same thing goes --
nigeria , saudi arabia , all sorts of countries .
because the aid and oil or mineral money acts the same way .
it empowers authorities , without activating the citizens -- their hands , legs , brains , what have you .
and if you agree with that , then i think the best way to improve these countries is to recognize that economic development is of the people , by the people , for the people .
and that is the real network effect .
if citizens can network and make themselves more organized and productive , so that their voices are heard , so then things would improve .
and to contrast that , you can see the most important institution in the world , the world bank , is an organization of the government , by the government , for the governments .
just see the contrast .
and that is the perspective i have , and then i can start my story .
of course , how would you empower citizens ?
there could be all sorts of technologies . and one is cell phones .
recently " the economist " recognized this , but i stumbled upon the idea 12 years ago , and that 's what i 've been working on .
so 12 years ago , i was trying to be an investment banker in new york .
we had -- quite a few our colleagues were connected by a computer network .
and we got more productive because we did n't have to exchange floppy disks ; we could update each other more often .
but one time it broke down .
and it reminded me of a day in 1971 .
there was a war going on in my country .
and my family moved out of an urban place , where we used to live , to a remote rural area where it was safer .
and one time my mother asked me to get some medicine for a younger sibling .
and i walked 10 miles or so , all morning , to get there , to the medicine man .
and he was n't there , so i walked all afternoon back .
so i had another unproductive day .
so while i was sitting in a tall building in new york , i put those two experiences together side by side , and basically concluded that connectivity is productivity -- whether it 's in a modern office or an underdeveloped village .
so naturally , i -- the implication of that is that the telephone is a weapon against poverty .
and if that 's the case , then the question is how many telephones did we have at that time ?
and it turns out , that there was one telephone in bangladesh for every 500 people .
and all those phones were in the few urban places .
the vast rural areas , where 100 million people lived , there were no telephones .
so just imagine how many man - months or man - years are wasted , just like i wasted a day .
if you just multiply by 100 million people , let 's say losing one day a month , whatever , and you see a vast amount of resource wasted .
and after all , poor countries , like rich countries , one thing we 've got equal , is their days are the same length : 24 hours .
so if you lose that precious resource , where you are somewhat equal to the richer countries , that 's a huge waste .
so i started looking for any evidence that -- does connectivity really increase productivity ?
and i could n't find much , really , but i found this graph produced by the itu , which is the international telecommunication union , based in geneva .
they show an interesting thing .
that you see , the horizontal axis is where you place your country .
so the united states or the uk would be here , outside .
and so the impact of one new telephone , which is on the vertical axis , is very little .
but if you come back to a poorer country , where the gnp per capita is , let 's say , 500 dollars , or 300 dollars , then the impact is huge : 6,000 dollars . or 5,000 dollars .
the question was , how much did it cost to install a new telephone in bangladesh ?
it turns out : 2,000 dollars .
so if you spend 2,000 dollars , and let 's say the telephone lasts 10 years ,
and if 5,000 dollars every year -- so that 's 50,000 dollars .
so obviously this was a gadget to have .
and of course , if the cost of installing a telephone is going down , because there 's a digital revolution going on , then it would be even more dramatic .
and i knew a little economics by then -- it says adam smith taught us that specialization leads to productivity .
but how would you specialize ?
let 's say i 'm a fisherman and a farmer .
and chris is a fisherman farmer . both are generalists .
so the point is that we could only -- the only way we could depend on each other , is if we can connect with each other .
and if we are neighbors , i could just walk over to his house .
but then we are limiting our economic sphere to something very small area .
but in order to expand that , you need a river , or you need a highway , or you need telephone lines .
but in any event , it 's connectivity that leads to dependability .
and that leads to specialization .
that leads to productivity .
so the question was , i started looking at this issue , and going back and forth between bangladesh and new york .
there were a lot of reasons people told me why we do n't have enough telephones .
and one of them is the lacking buying power .
poor people apparently do n't have the power to buy .
but the point is , if it 's a production tool , why do we have to worry about that ?
i mean , in america , people buy cars , and they put very little money down .
they get a car , and they go to work .
the work pays them a salary ; the salary allows them to pay for the car over time .
the car pays for itself .
so if the telephone is a production tool , then we do n't quite have to worry about the purchasing power .
and of course , even if that 's true , then what about initial buying power ?
so then the question is , why ca n't we have some kind of shared access ?
in the united states , we have -- everybody needs a banking service , but very few of us are trying to buy a bank .
so it 's -- a bank tends to serve a whole community .
so we could do that for telephones .
and also people told me that we have a lot of important primary needs to meet : food , clothing , shelter , whatever .
but again , it 's very paternalistic .
you should be raising income and let people decide what they want to do with their money .
but the real problem is the lack of other infrastructures .
see , you need some kind of infrastructure to bring a new thing .
for instance , the internet was booming in the u.s. because there were -- there were people who had computers .
they had modems .
they had telephone lines , so it 's very easy to bring in a new idea , like the internet .
but that 's what 's lacking in a poor country .
so for example , we did n't have ways to have credit checks , few banks to collect bills , etc.
but that 's why i noticed grameen bank , which is a bank for poor people , and had 1,100 branches , 12,000 employees , 2.3 million borrowers .
and they had these branches .
i thought i could put cell towers and create a network .
and anyway , to cut the time short -- so i started -- i first went to them and said , " you know , perhaps i could connect all your branches and make you more efficient . "
but you know , they have , after all , evolved in a country without telephones , so they are decentralized . i mean , of course there might be other good reasons , but this was one of the reasons -- they had to be .
and so they were not that interested to connect all their branches , and then to be -- and rock the boat .
so i started focusing . what is it that they really do ?
so what happens is that somebody borrows money from the bank .
she typically buys a cow . the cow gives milk .
and she sells the milk to the villagers , and pays off the loan .
and this is a business for her , but it 's milk for everybody else .
and suddenly i realized that a cell phone could be a cow .
because some way she could borrow 200 dollars from the bank , get a phone and have the phone for everybody .
and it 's a business for her .
so i wrote to the bank , and they thought for a while , and they said , " it 's a little crazy , but logical .
if you think it can be done , come and make it happen . "
so i quit my job ; i went back to bangladesh .
i created a company in america called gonofone , which in bengali means " people 's phone . "
and angel investors in america put in money into that .
i flew around the world .
after about a million -- i mean , i got rejected from lots of places , because i was not only trying to go to a poor country , i was trying to go to the poor of the poor country .
after about a million miles , and a meaningful -- a substantial loss of hair , i eventually put together a consortium , and -- which involved the norwegian telephone company , which provided the know - how , and the grameen bank provided the infrastructure to spread the service .
to make the story short , here is the coverage of the country .
you can see it 's pretty much covered .
even in bangladesh , there are some empty places .
but we are also investing around another 300 million dollars this year to extend that coverage .
now , about that cow model i talked about .
there are about 115,000 people who are retailing telephone services in their neighborhoods .
and it 's serving 52,000 villages , which represent about 80 million people .
and these phones are generating about 100 million dollars for the company .
and two dollars profit per entrepreneur per day , which is like 700 dollars per year .
and of course , it 's very beneficial in a lot of ways .
it increases income , improves welfare , etc.
and the result is , right now , this company is the largest telephone company , with 3.5 million subscribers ,
115,000 of these phones i talked about -- that produces about a third of the traffic in the network .
and 2004 , the net profit , after taxes -- very serious taxes -- was 120 million dollars .
and the company contributed about 190 million dollars to the government coffers .
and again , here are some of the lessons .
" the government needs to provide economically viable services . "
actually , this is an instance where private companies can provide that .
" governments need to subsidize private companies . "
this is what some people think .
and actually , private companies help governments with taxes .
" poor people are recipients . "
poor people are a resource .
" services cost too much for the poor . "
their involvement reduces the cost .
" the poor are uneducated and cannot do much . "
they are very eager learners and very capable survivors .
i 've been very surprised .
most of them learn how to operate a telephone within a day .
" poor countries need aid . "
businesses -- this one company has raised the -- if the ideal figures are even five percent true , this one company is raising the gnp of the country much more than the aid the country receives .
and as i was trying to show you , as far as i 'm concerned , aid does damages because it removes the government from its citizens .
and this is a new project i have with dean kamen , the famous inventor in america .
he has produced some power generators , which we are now doing an experiment in bangladesh , in two villages where cow manure is producing biogas , which is running these generators .
and each of these generators is selling electricity to 20 houses each .
it 's just an experiment .
we do n't know how far it will go , but it 's going on .
thank you .
