hi there .
i 'm going to be talking a little bit about music , machines and life .
or , more specifically , what we learned from the creation of a very large and complicated machine for a music video .
some of you may recognize this image .
this is the opening frame of the video that we created .
we 'll be showing the video at the end , but before we do , i want to talk a little bit about what it is that they wanted .
now , when we first started talking to ok go -- the name of the song is " this too shall pass " -- we were really excited because they expressed interest in building a machine that they could dance with .
and we were very excited about this because , of course , they have a history of dancing with machines .
they 're responsible for this video , " here it goes again . "
50 - million - plus views on youtube .
four guys dancing on treadmills , no cuts , just a static camera .
a fantastically viral and wonderful video .
so we were really excited about working with them .
and we sort of started talking about what it is that they wanted .
and they explained that they wanted kind of a rube goldberg machine .
now , for those of you who do n't know , a rube goldberg machine is a complicated contraption , an incredibly over - engineered piece of machinery that accomplishes a relatively simple task .
so we were excited by this idea , and we started talking about exactly what it would look like .
and we came up with some parameters , because , you know , building a rube goldberg machine has limitations , but it also is pretty wide open .
and we wanted to make sure that we did something that would work for a music video .
so we came up with a list of requirements , the " 10 commandments , " and they were , in order of ascending difficulty : the first is " no magic . "
everything that happened on screen had to be very easily understood by a typical viewer .
the rule of thumb was that , if my mother could n't understand it , then we could n't use it in the video .
they wanted band integration , that is , the machine acting upon the band members , specifically not the other way around .
they wanted the machine action to follow the song feeling .
so as the song picks up emotion , so should the machine get grander in its process .
they wanted us to make use of the space .
so we have this 10,000 - square - foot warehouse we were using , divided between two floors .
it included an exterior loading dock .
we used all of that , including a giant hole in the floor that we actually descended the camera and cameraman through .
they wanted it messy , and we were happy to oblige .
the machine itself would start the music .
so the machine would get started , it would travel some distance , reacting along the way , hit play on an ipod or a tape deck or something that would start playback .
and the machine would maintain synchronization throughout .
and speaking of synchronization , they wanted it to sync to the rhythm and to hit specific beats along the way .
okay .
they wanted it to end precisely on time .
okay , so now the start to finish timing has to be perfect .
and they wanted the music to drop out at a certain point in the video and actual live audio from the machine to play part of the song .
and as if that was n't enough , all of these incredibly complicating things , right , they wanted it in one shot .
okay .
so , just some statistics about what we went through in the process .
the machine itself has 89 distinct interactions .
it took us 85 takes to get it on film to our satisfaction .
of those 85 takes , only three actually successfully completed their run .
we destroyed two pianos and 10 televisions in the process .
we went to home depot well over a hundred times .
and we lost one high - heeled shoe when one of our engineers , heather knight , left her high - heeled shoe -- after a nice dinner , and returned back to the build -- and left it in a pile of stuff .
and another engineer thought , " well , that would be a really good thing to use " and ended up using it as a really nice trigger .
and it 's actually in the machine .
so what did we learn from all of this ?
well , having completed this , we have the opportunity to step back and reflect on some of the things .
and we learned that small stuff stinks .
little balls in wooden tracks are really susceptible to humidity and temperature and a little bit of dust , and they fall out of the tracks , the exact angles makes it hard to get right .
and yet , a bowling ball will always follow the same path .
it does n't matter what temperature it is , does n't matter what 's in its way ; it will pretty much get where it needs to go .
but as much as the small stuff stinks , we needed somewhere to start , so that we would have somewhere to go .
and so you have to start with it . you have to focus on it .
small stuff stinks , but , of course , it 's essential , right ?
what else ? planning is incredibly important .
you know , we spent a lot of time ideating and even building some of these things .
it 's been said that , " no battle plan survives contact with the enemy . "
i think our enemy was physics -- and she 's a cruel mistress .
often , we had to pull things out as a result because of timing or aesthetics or whatever .
and so while planning is important , so is flexibility .
these are all things that ended up not making it into the final machine .
so also , put reliable stuff last , the stuff that 's going to run every time .
again , small to large is relevant here .
the little lego car in the beginning of the video references the big , real car near the end of the video .
the big , real car works every time ; there 's no problem about it .
the little one had a tendency to try to run off the track and that 's a problem .
but you do n't want to have to reset the whole machine because the lego car at the end does n't work , right .
so you put that up front so that , if it fails , at least you know you do n't have to reset the whole thing .
life can be messy .
there were incredibly difficult moments in the building of this thing .
months were spent in this tiny , cold warehouse .
and the wonderful elation that we had when we finally completed it .
so it 's important to remember that whether it 's good or it 's bad , " this too shall pass . "
thank you very much .
and now to introduce their music video , we have ok go .
ok go : an introduction . hello tedxusc .
we are ok go .
what are we doing ? oh , just hanging out with our grammy . what what !
it think we can do better than this . hello tedxusc .
we are ok go . have you read the " natural curiosity cabinet ? "
i mean , " curiosity " -- excuse me .
let me start again .
we need some more ridiculous things besides " the cabinet of natural curiosities . "
tim 's sundial hat .
have you seen the new work they 've done to the waltz towers ?
sorry , start again .
dogs .
hello , tedxusc . we are ok go , and this our new video , " this too shall pass . "
[ unclear ] kay , we can still do one better i think , yeah .
that one 's pretty good . it 's getting better .
