so i understand that this meeting was planned , and the slogan was from was to still .
and i am illustrating still .
which , of course , i am not agreeing with because , although i am 94 , i am not still working .
and anybody who asks me , " are you still doing this or that ? "
i do n't answer because i 'm not doing things still , i 'm doing it like i always did .
i still have -- or did i use the word still ? i did n't mean that .
i have my file which is called to do . i have my plans .
i have my clients . i am doing my work like i always did .
so this takes care of my age .
i want to show you my work so you know what i am doing and why i am here .
this was about 1925 .
all of these things were made during the last 75 years .
but , of course , i 'm working since 25 , doing more or less what you see here . this is castleton china .
this was an exhibition at the museum of modern art .
this is now for sale at the metropolitan museum .
this is still at the metropolitan museum now for sale .
this is a portrait of my daughter and myself .
these were just some of the things i 've made .
i made hundreds of them for the last 75 years .
i call myself a maker of things .
i do n't call myself an industrial designer because i 'm other things .
industrial designers want to make novel things .
novelty is a concept of commerce , not an aesthetic concept .
the industrial design magazine , i believe , is called " innovation . "
innovation is not part of the aim of my work .
well , makers of things : they make things more beautiful , more elegant , more comfortable than just the craftsmen do .
i have so much to say . i have to think what i am going to say .
well , to describe our profession otherwise , we are actually concerned with the playful search for beauty .
that means the playful search for beauty was called the first activity of man .
sarah smith , who was a mathematics professor at mit , wrote , " the playful search for beauty was man 's first activity -- that all useful qualities and all material qualities were developed from the playful search for beauty . "
these are tiles . the word , " playful " is a necessary aspect of our work because , actually , one of our problems is that we have to make , produce , lovely things throughout all of life , and this for me is now 75 years .
so how can you , without drying up , make things with the same pleasure , as a gift to others , for so long ?
the playful is therefore an important part of our quality as designer .
let me tell you some about my life .
as i said , i started to do these things 75 years ago .
my first exhibition in the united states was at the sesquicentennial exhibition in 1926 -- that the hungarian government sent one of my hand - drawn pieces as part of the exhibit .
my work actually took me through many countries , and showed me a great part of the world .
this is not that they took me -- the work did n't take me -- i made the things particularly because i wanted to use them to see the world .
i was incredibly curious to see the world , and i made all these things , which then finally did take me to see many countries and many cultures .
i started as an apprentice to a hungarian craftsman , and this taught me what the guild system was in middle ages .
the guild system : that means when i was an apprentice , i had to apprentice myself in order to become a pottery master .
in my shop where i studied , or learned , there was a traditional hierarchy of master , journeyman and learned worker , and apprentice , and i worked as the apprentice .
the work as an apprentice was very primitive .
that means i had to actually learn every aspect of making pottery by hand .
we mashed the clay with our feet when it came from the hillside .
after that , it had to be kneaded . it had to then go in , kind of , a mangle .
and then finally it was prepared for the throwing .
and there i really worked as an apprentice .
my master took me to set ovens because this was part of oven - making , oven - setting , in the time .
and finally , i had received a document that i had accomplished my apprenticeship successfully , that i had behaved morally , and this document was given to me by the guild of roof - coverers , rail - diggers , oven - setters , chimney sweeps and potters .
i also got at the time a workbook which explained my rights and my working conditions , and i still have that workbook .
first i set up a shop in my own garden , and made pottery which i sold on the marketplace in budapest .
and there i was sitting , and my then - boyfriend -- i did n't mean it was a boyfriend like it is meant today -- but my boyfriend and i sat at the market and sold the pots .
my mother thought that this was not very proper , so she sat with us to add propriety to this activity .
however , after a while there was a new factory being built in budapest , a pottery factory , a large one .
and i visited it with several ladies , and asked all sorts of questions of the director .
then the director asked me , why do you ask all these questions ?
i said , i also have a pottery .
so he asked me , could he please visit me , and then finally he did , and explained to me that what i did now in my shop was an anachronism , that the industrial revolution had broken out , and that i rather should join the factory .
there he made an art department for me where i worked for several months .
however , everybody in the factory spent his time at the art department .
the director there said there were several women casting and producing my designs now in molds , and this was sold also to america .
i remember that it was quite successful .
however , the director , the chemist , model maker -- everybody -- concerned himself much more with the art department -- that means , with my work -- than making toilets , so finally they got a letter from the center , from the bank who owned the factory , saying , make toilet - setting behind the art department , and that was my end .
so this gave me the possibility because now i was a journeyman , and journeymen also take their satchel and go to see the world .
so as a journeyman , i put an ad into the paper that i had studied , that i was a down - to - earth potter 's journeyman and i was looking for a job as a journeyman .
and i got several answers , and i accepted the one which was farthest from home and practically , i thought , halfway to america .
and that was in hamburg .
then i first took this job in hamburg , at an art pottery where everything was done on the wheel , and so i worked in a shop where there were several potters .
and the first day , i was coming to take my place at the turntable -- there were three or four turntables -- and one of them , behind where i was sitting , was a hunchback , a deaf - mute hunchback , who smelled very bad .
so i doused him in cologne every day , which he thought was very nice , and therefore he brought bread and butter every day , which i had to eat out of courtesy .
the first day i came to work in this shop there was on my wheel a surprise for me .
my colleagues had thoughtfully put on the wheel where i was supposed to work a very nicely modeled natural man 's organs .
after i brushed them off with a hand motion , they were very -- i finally was now accepted , and worked there for some six months .
this was my first job .
if i go on like this , you will be here till midnight .
so i will try speed it up a little
moderator : eva , we have about five minutes .
eva zeisel : are you sure ?
moderator : yes , i am sure .
ez : well , if you are sure , i have to tell you that within five minutes i will talk very fast .
and actually , my work took me to many countries because i used my work to fill my curiosity .
and among other things , other countries i worked , was in the soviet union , where i worked from '32 to '37 -- actually , to '36 .
i was finally there , although i had nothing to do -- i was a foreign expert .
i became art director of the china and glass industry , and eventually under stalin 's purges -- at the beginning of stalin 's purges , i did n't know that hundreds of thousands of innocent people were arrested .
so i was arrested quite early in stalin 's purges , and spent 16 months in a russian prison .
the accusation was that i had successfully prepared an attentat on stalin 's life .
this was a very dangerous accusation .
and if this is the end of my five minutes , i want to tell you that i actually did survive , which was a surprise .
but since i survived and i 'm here , and since this is the end of the five minutes , i will -- moderator : tell me when your last trip to russia was .
were n't you there recently ?
ez : oh , this summer , in fact , the lomonosov factory was bought by an american company , invited me .
they found out that i had worked in '33 at this factory , and they came to my studio in rockland county , and brought the 15 of their artists to visit me here .
and they invited myself to come to the russian factory last summer , in july , to make some dishes , design some dishes .
and since i do n't like to travel alone , they also invited my daughter , son - in - law and granddaughter , so we had a lovely trip to see russia today , which is not a very pleasant and happy view .
here i am now , if this is the end ? thank you .
