video : narrator : an event seen from one point of view gives one impression .
seen from another point of view , it gives quite a different impression .
but it 's only when you get the whole picture you can fully understand what 's going on .
sasha vucinic : it 's a great clip , is n't it ?
and i found that in 29 seconds , it tells more about the power of , and importance of , independent media than i could say in an hour .
so i thought that it will be good to start with it .
and also start with a little bit of statistics .
according to relevant researchers , 83 percent of the population of this planet lives in the societies without independent press .
think about that number : 83 percent of the population on the whole planet does not really know what is going on in their countries .
the information they get gets filtered through somebody who either twists that information , or colors that information , does something with it .
so they 're deprived of understanding their reality .
that is just to understand how big and important this problem is .
now those of you who are lucky enough to live in those societies that represent 17 percent , i think should enjoy it until it lasts .
you know , sunday morning , you flick the paper , get your cappuccino .
enjoy it while it lasts .
because as we heard yesterday , countries can lose stars from their flags , but they can also lose press freedom , as i guess americans among us can tell us more about .
but that 's totally another and separate topic .
so i can go back to my story .
my story starts -- the story i want to share -- starts in 1991 .
at that time i was running b 92 , the only independent , for that matter the only electronic media , in the country .
and i guess we were sharing -- we had that regular life of the only independent media in the country , operating in hostile environment , where government really wants to make your life miserable .
and there are different ways .
yeah , it was the usual cocktail : a little bit of threats , a little bit of friendly advice , a little bit of financial police , a little bit of text control , so you always have somebody who never leaves your office .
but what they really do , which is very powerful , and that is what governments in the late '90s started doing if they do n't like independent media companies -- you know , they threaten your advertisers .
once they threaten your advertisers , market forces are actually , you know , destroyed , and the advertisers do not want to come -- no matter how much does it make sense for them -- do not want to come and advertise .
and you have a problem making ends meet .
at that time at the beginning of the '90s , we had that problem , which was , you know , survival below one side , but what was really painful for me was , remember , the beginning of the '90s , yugoslavia is falling apart .
we were sitting over there with a country in a downfall , in a slow - motion downfall .
and we all had all of that on tapes .
we had the ability to understand what was going on .
we were actually recording history .
the problem was that we had to re - tape that history a week later ; because if we did not , we could not afford enough tapes to keep archives of that history .
so if i gave you that picture , i do n't want to go too long on that .
in that context a gentleman came to my office at that time .
it was still 1991 .
he was running a media systems organization which is still in business , the gentleman is still in business .
and what did i know at that time about media systems ?
i would think media systems were organizations , which means they should help you .
so i prepared two plans for that meeting , two strategic plans : the small one and the big one .
the small one was , i just wanted him to help us get those damn tapes , so we can keep that archive for the next 50 years .
the big plan was to ask him for a 1,000,000 - dollar loan .
because i thought , i still maintain , that serious and independent media companies are great business .
and i thought that b 92 will survive and be a great company once milosevic is gone , which turned out to be true .
it 's now probably either the biggest or the second biggest media company in the country .
and i thought that the only thing that we needed at that time was 1,000,000 - dollar loan to take us through those hard times .
to make a long story short , the gentleman comes into the office , great suit and tie .
i gave him what i thought was a brilliant explanation of the political situation and explained how hard and difficult the war will be .
actually , i underestimated the atrocities , i have to admit .
anyway , after that whole , big , long explanation , the only question he had for me -- and this is not a joke -- is , are we paying royalties after we broadcast music of michael jackson ?
that was really the only question he had .
he left , and i remember being actually very angry at myself because i thought there must be an institution in the world that is providing loans to media companies .
it 's so obvious , straight in your face , and somebody must have thought of it .
somebody must have started something like that .
and i thought , i 'm just dumb and i cannot find it .
you know , in my defense , there was no google at that time ; you could not just google in '91 .
so i thought that that 's actually my problem .
now we go from here , fast forward to 1995 .
i have -- i left the country , i have a meeting with george soros , trying for the third time to convince him that his foundation should invest in something that should operate like a media bank .
and basically what i was saying is very simple .
you know , forget about charity ; it does n't work .
forget about handouts ; 20,000 dollars do not help anybody .
what you should do is you should treat media companies as a business .
it 's business anywhere .
media business , or any other business , it needs to be capitalized .
and what these guys need , actually , is access to capital .
so third meeting , arguments are pretty well exercised .
at the end of the meeting he says , look , it is not going to work ; you will never see your money back ; but my foundations will put 500,000 dollars so you can test the idea .
see that it will not work .
he said , i 'll give you a rope to hang yourself .
i knew two things after that meeting .
first , under no circumstances i want to hang myself .
and second , that i have no idea how to make it work .
you see , at the level of a concept , it was a great concept .
but it 's one thing to have a concept ; it 's a totally separate thing to actually make it work .
so i had absolutely no idea how that could actually work .
had the wrong idea ; i thought that we can be a bank .
you see banks -- i do n't know if there are any bankers over here ; i apologize in advance -- but it 's the best job in the world .
you know , you find somebody who is respectable and has a lot of money .
you give them more money ; they repay you that over a time .
you collect interest and do nothing in between .
so i thought , why do n't we get into that business ?
so here we are having our first client , brilliant .
first independent newspaper in slovakia .
the government cutting them off from all the printing facilities in bratislava .
so here 's the daily newspaper that has to be printed 400 kilometers away from the capital .
it 's a daily newspaper with a deadline of 4 p.m.
that means that they have no sports ; they have no latest news ; circulation goes down .
it 's a kind of very nice , sophisticated way how to economically strangle a daily newspaper .
they come to us with a request for a loan .
they want to -- the only way for them to survive is to get a printing press .
and we said , that 's fine ; let 's meet ; you 'll bring us your business plan , which eventually they did .
we start the meeting .
i get these two pieces of paper , not like this , a 4 format , so it 's much bigger .
a lot of numbers there . a lot of numbers .
but however you put it , you know , the numbers do not make any sense .
and that 's the best they could do .
we were the best that they could do .
so that is how we understood what our method is .
it 's not a bank . we had to actually go into these companies and earn our return by fixing them -- by establishing management systems , by providing all that knowledge , how do you run a business on one side -- while they all know how to run , how to create content .
just quickly on the results .
over these 10 years , 40 million dollars in affordable financing , average interest rate five percent to six percent .
lately we are going wild , charging seven percent from time to time .
we do it in 17 countries of the developing world .
and here is the most stunning number .
return rate -- the one that soros was so worried about -- 97 percent .
97 percent of all the scheduled repayments came back to us on time .
what do we typically finance ?
we finance anything that a media company would need , from printing presses to transmitters .
what is most important is we do it either in form of loans , equities , lease -- whatever is appropriate for , you know , supporting anybody .
but what is most important here is , who do we finance ?
we believe that in the last 10 years companies that we 've financed are actually the best media companies in the developing world .
that is a " who is who " list .
and i could spend hours talking about them , because they 're all kind of heroes .
and i can , but i 'll give you just , maybe one , and depending on time i may give you two examples who we work with .
you see we started working in eastern and central europe , and moved to russia .
our first loan in russia was in chelyabinsk .
i 'll bet half of you have never heard of that place .
in the south of russia there 's a guy called boris nikolayevich kirshin , who is running an independent newspaper there .
the city was closed until early '90s because , of all things , they were producing glass for tupolev planes .
anyway , he 's running independent newspaper there .
after two years working with us , he becomes the most respected newspaper in that small place .
governor comes to him one day , actually invites him to come to his office .
he goes and sees the governor . the governor says , boris nikolayevich , i understand you are doing a great job , and you are the most respected newspaper in our district .
and i want to offer you a deal .
can you please give me your newspaper for the next nine months , because i have elections -- there are elections coming up in nine months .
i will not run , but it 's very important for me who is going to succeed me .
so give me the paper for nine months . i 'll give it back to you .
i have no interest in being in media business .
how much would that cost ?
boris nikolayevich says , " it 's not for sale . "
the governor says , " we will close you . "
boris nikolayevich says , " no , you cannot do it . "
six months later the newspaper was closed .
luckily , we had enough time to help boris nikolayevich take all the assets out of that company and bring him into a new one , to get all the subscription lists , rehire staff .
so what the governor got was an empty shell .
but that is what happens if you 're in business of independent media , and if you are a banker for independent media .
so it sounds like a great story .
somewhere down the road we opened a media management center .
we started our media lab , sounds like a real great story .
but there is a second angle to that .
the second angle , like in this clip .
if you take the camera above , you start thinking about these numbers again .
40 million dollars over 10 years spread over 17 countries .
that is not too much , is it ?
it 's actually just a drop in the sea .
because when you think about the importance , some of the issues that we were talking about last night -- this last session we had about africa and his hypothetical 50 billion dollars destined for africa .
all of those , not all , half of those problems mentioned last night -- government accountability , corruption , how do you fight corruption , giving voice to unheard , to poor -- it 's why independent media is in business .
and it 's why it was invented .
so from that perspective , what we did is just really one drop in the sea of that need that we can identify .
now ours is just one story .
i 'm sure that in this room there are , like , 15 other wonderful stories of nonprofits doing spectacular work .
here is where the problem is , and i 'll explain to you as well as i can what the problem is .
and it 's called fundraising .
imagine that this third of this room is filled with people who represent different foundations .
imagine two thirds over here running excellent organizations , doing very important work .
now imagine that every second person over here is deaf , does not hear , and switch the lights off .
now that is how difficult it is to match people from this side of the room with people of that side of the room .
so we thought that some kind of a big idea is needed to reform , to totally rethink fundraising .
you know , instead of people running in this dark , trying to find their own match , who will be willing , who has the same goals .
instead of all of that we thought there is -- something new needs to be invented .
and we came up with this idea of issuing bonds , press freedom bonds .
if there are investors willing to finance u.s. government budget deficit , why would n't we find investors willing to finance press freedom deficit ?
we 've decided to do it this fall ; we will issue them , probably in denominations of 1,000 dollars .
i do n't want to advertise them too much ; that 's not the point .
but the point is , if we ever survive to actually issue them , find enough investors that this can be considered a success , there 's nothing stopping the next organization to start to issue bonds next spring .
and those can be environmental bonds .
and then two weeks later , iqbal quadir can issue his electricity in bangladesh bonds .
and before you know it , any social cause can be actually financed in this way .
now we do daydreaming in 11:30 with 55 seconds left .
but let 's take the idea further .
you do it , you start it in the states , because it 's , you know , concepts are very , very close to american minds .
but you can actually bring it to europe , too .
you can bring it to asia .
you can , once you have all of those different points , you can make it easy for investors .
put all of those bonds at one place and they sit down and click .
once you have more than 10 of them you have to develop some kind of a matrix .
what do investors get ?
on one side financial , on the other side social .
so that brings the idea of some kind of rating agency , morningstar type .
it says , you know , social impact over here is spectacular , five stars .
financial , they give you one percent , only one star .
now take it to the last step .
once you have all of that put together , there 's not one reason why you could n't actually have a marketplace for all of that , where you cannot dispose of all of those bonds in a pretty quick way .
and in that way you organize the financing so there are no dark rooms , no blind people running around to find each other .
thank you .
