well , there 's lots to talk about , but i think i 'm just going to play to start off .
♫ when i wake up ♫ ♫ in the morning ♫ ♫ i pour the coffee ♫ ♫ i read the paper ♫ ♫ and then i slowly ♫ ♫ and so softly ♫ ♫ do the dishes ♫ ♫ so feed the fishes ♫ ♫ you sing me happy birthday ♫ ♫ like it 's gonna be ♫ ♫ your last day ♫ ♫ here on earth ♫ all right .
so , i wanted to do something special today .
i want to debut a new song that i 've been working on in the last five or six months .
and there 's few things more thrilling than playing a song for the first time in front of an audience , especially when it 's half - finished .
i 'm kind of hoping some conversations here might help me finish it .
because it gets into all sorts of crazy realms .
and so this is basically a song about loops , but not the kind of loops that i make up here .
they 're feedback loops .
and in the audio world that 's when the microphone gets too close to its sound source , and then it gets in this self - destructive loop that creates a very unpleasant sound .
and i 'm going to demonstrate for you .
i 'm not going to hurt you . do n't worry .
♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ this is a -- all right . i do n't know if that was necessary to demonstrate -- -- but my point is it 's the sound of self - destruction .
and i 've been thinking about how that applies across a whole spectrum of realms , from , say , the ecological , okay .
there seems to be a rule in nature that if you get too close to where you came from , it gets ugly .
so like , you ca n't feed cows their own brains
or you get mad cow disease , and inbreeding and incest and , let 's see , what 's the other one ?
biological -- there 's autoimmune diseases , where the body attacks itself a little too overzealously and destroys the host , or the person .
and then -- okay , this is where we get to the song -- kind of bridges the gap to the emotional .
because although i 've used scientific terms in songs , it 's very difficult sometimes to make them lyrical .
and there 's some things you just do n't need to have in songs .
so i 'm trying to bridge this gap between this idea and this melody .
and so , i do n't know if you 've ever had this , but when i close my eyes sometimes and try to sleep , i ca n't stop thinking about my own eyes .
and it 's like your eyes start straining to see themselves .
that 's what it feels like to me .
it 's not pleasant .
i 'm sorry if i put that idea in your head .
it 's impossible , of course , for your eyes to see themselves , but they seem to be trying .
so that 's getting a little more closer to a personal experience .
or ears being able to hear themselves -- it 's just impossible . that 's the thing .
so , i 've been working on this song that mentions these things and then also imagines a person who 's been so successful at defending themselves from heartbreak that they 're left to do the deed themselves , if that 's possible .
and that 's what the song is asking .
all right .
it does n't have a name yet .
♫ go ahead and congratulate yourself ♫ ♫ give yourself a hand , the hand is your hand ♫ ♫ and the eye that eyes itself is your eye ♫ ♫ and the ear that hears itself is near ♫ ♫ ' cause it 's your ear , oh oh ♫ ♫ you 've done the impossible now ♫ ♫ took yourself apart ♫ ♫ you made yourself invulnerable ♫ ♫ no one can break your heart ♫ ♫ so you wear it out ♫ ♫ and you wring it out ♫ ♫ and you wear it out ♫ ♫ and you break it yourself ♫ ♫ breaking your own , break it yourself ♫ ♫ breaking your own , break it yourself ♫ ♫ breaking your own ♫ thanks .
all right .
it 's kind of cool . songwriters can sort of get away with murder .
you can throw out crazy theories and not have to back it up with data or graphs or research .
but , you know , i think reckless curiosity would be what the world needs now , just a little bit .
i 'm going to finish up with a song of mine called " weather systems . "
♫ quiet ♫ ♫ quiet down , she said ♫ ♫ speak into the back of his head ♫ ♫ on the edge of the bed , i can see your blood flow ♫ ♫ i can see your ♫ ♫ cells grow ♫ ♫ hold still awhile ♫ ♫ do n't spill the wine ♫ ♫ i can see it all from here ♫ ♫ i can see ♫ ♫ oh , i ♫ ♫ i can see ♫ ♫ weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ some things you say ♫ ♫ are not for sale ♫ ♫ i would hold it where ♫ ♫ our free agents of some substance are ♫ ♫ scared ♫ ♫ hold still a while ♫ ♫ do n't spill the wine ♫ ♫ i can see it all from here ♫ ♫ i can see ♫ ♫ oh , i ♫ ♫ i can see ♫ ♫ weather systems of the world ♫ ♫ weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ thanks .
