i wanted to be a rock star .
i dreamed of it , and that 's all i dreamed of .
to be more accurate , i wanted to be a pop star .
this was in the late '80s .
and mostly i wanted to be the fifth member of depeche mode or duran duran .
they would n't have me .
i did n't read music , but i played synthesizers and drum machines .
and i grew up in this little farming town in northern nevada .
and i was certain that 's what my life would be .
and when i went to college at the university of nevada , las vegas when i was 18 , i was stunned to find that there was not a pop star 101 , or even a degree program for that interest .
and the choir conductor there knew that i sang and invited me to come and join the choir .
and i said , " yes , i would love to do that . it sounds great . "
and i left the room and said , " no way . "
the choir people in my high school were pretty geeky , and there was no way i was going to have anything to do with those people .
and about a week later , a friend of mine came to me and said , " listen , you 've got to join choir .
at the end of the semester , we 're taking a trip to mexico , all expenses paid .
and the soprano section is just full of hot girls . "
and so i figured for mexico and babes , i could do just about anything .
and i went to my first day in choir , and i sat down with the basses and sort of looked over my shoulder to see what they were doing .
they opened their scores , the conductor gave the downbeat , and boom , they launched into the kyrie from the " requiem " by mozart .
in my entire life i had seen in black and white , and suddenly everything was in shocking technicolor .
the most transformative experience i 've ever had -- in that single moment , hearing dissonance and harmony and people singing , people together , the shared vision .
and i felt for the first time in my life that i was part of something bigger than myself .
and there were a lot of cute girls in the soprano section , as it turns out .
i decided to write a piece for choir a couple of years later as a gift to this conductor who had changed my life .
i had learned to read music by then , or slowly learning to read music .
and that piece was published , and then i wrote another piece , and that got published .
and then i started conducting , and i ended up doing my master 's degree at the juilliard school .
and i find myself now in the unlikely position of standing in front of all of you as a professional classical composer and conductor .
well a couple of years ago , a friend of mine emailed me a link , a youtube link , and said , " you have got to see this . "
and it was this young woman who had posted a fan video to me , singing the soprano line to a piece of mine called " sleep . "
britlin losee : hi mr. eric whitacre .
my name is britlin losee , and this is a video that i 'd like to make for you .
here 's me singing " sleep . "
i 'm a little nervous , just to let you know .
♫ if there are noises ♫ ♫ in the night ♫ eric whitacre : i was thunderstruck .
britlin was so innocent and so sweet , and her voice was so pure .
and i even loved seeing behind her ;
i could see the little teddy bear sitting on the piano behind her in her room .
such an intimate video .
and i had this idea : if i could get 50 people to all do this same thing , sing their parts -- soprano , alto , tenor and bass -- wherever they were in the world , post their videos to youtube , we could cut it all together and create a virtual choir .
so i wrote on my blog , " omg omg . "
i actually wrote , " omg , " hopefully for the last time in public ever .
and i sent out this call to singers .
and i made free the download of the music to a piece that i had written in the year 2000 called " lux aurumque , " which means " light and gold . "
and lo and behold , people started uploading their videos .
now i should say , before that , what i did is i posted a conductor track of myself conducting .
and it 's in complete silence when i filmed it , because i was only hearing the music in my head , imagining the choir that would one day come to be .
afterwards , i played a piano track underneath so that the singers would have something to listen to .
and then as the videos started to come in ...
this is cheryl ang from singapore .
this is evangelina etienne from massachusetts .
stephen hanson from sweden .
this is jamal walker from dallas , texas .
there was even a little soprano solo in the piece , and so i had auditions .
and a number of sopranos uploaded their parts .
i was told later , and also by lots of singers who were involved in this , that they sometimes recorded 50 or 60 different takes until they got just the right take -- they uploaded it .
here 's our winner of the soprano solo .
this is melody myers from tennessee .
i love the little smile she does right over the top of the note -- like , " no problem , everything 's fine . "
and from the crowd emerged this young man , scott haines .
and he said , " listen , this is the project i 've been looking for my whole life .
i 'd like to be the person to edit this all together . "
i said , " thank you , scott . i 'm so glad that you found me . "
and scott aggregated all of the videos .
he scrubbed the audio .
he made sure that everything lined up .
and then we posted this video to youtube about a year and a half ago .
this is " lux aurumque " sung by the virtual choir .
i 'll stop it there in the interest of time .
thank you . thank you .
thank you .
so there 's more . there 's more .
thank you so much .
and i had the same reaction you did .
i actually was moved to tears when i first saw it .
i just could n't believe the poetry of all of it -- these souls all on their own desert island , sending electronic messages in bottles to each other .
and the video went viral .
we had a million hits in the first month and got a lot of attention for it .
and because of that , then a lot of singers started saying , " all right , what 's virtual choir 2.0 ? "
and so i decided for virtual choir 2.0 that i would choose the same piece that britlin was singing , " sleep , " which is another work that i wrote in the year 2000 -- poetry by my dear friend charles anthony silvestri .
and again , i posted a conductor video , and we started accepting submissions .
this time we got some more mature members .
and some younger members .
soprano : ♫ upon my pillow ♫ ♫ safe in bed ♫ ew : that 's georgie from england . she 's only nine .
is n't that the sweetest thing you 've ever seen ?
someone did all eight videos -- a bass even singing the soprano parts .
this is beau awtin .
beau awtin : ♫ safe in bed ♫ ew : and our goal -- it was sort of an arbitrary goal -- there was an mtv video where they all sang " lollipop " and they got people from all over the world to just sing that little melody .
and there were 900 people involved in that .
so i told the singers , " that 's our goal .
that 's the number for us to beat . "
and we just closed submissions january 10th , and our final tally was 2,051 videos from 58 different countries .
thank you .
from malta , madagascar , thailand , vietnam , jordan , egypt , israel , as far north as alaska and as far south as new zealand .
and we also put a page on facebook for the singers to upload their testimonials , what it was like for them , their experience singing it .
and i 've just chosen a few of them here .
" my sister and i used to sing in choirs together constantly .
now she 's an airman in the air force constantly traveling .
it 's so wonderful to sing together again ! "
i love the idea that she 's singing with her sister .
" aside from the beautiful music , it 's great just to know i 'm part of a worldwide community of people i never met before , but who are connected anyway . "
and my personal favorite , " when i told my husband that i was going to be a part of this , he told me that i did not have the voice for it . "
yeah , i 'm sure a lot of you have heard that too .
me too .
" it hurt so much , and i shed some tears , but something inside of me wanted to do this despite his words .
it is a dream come true to be part of this choir , as i 've never been part of one .
when i placed a marker on the google earth map , i had to go with the nearest city , which is about 400 miles away from where i live .
as i am in the great alaskan bush , satellite is my connection to the world . "
so two things struck me deeply about this .
the first is that human beings will go to any lengths necessary to find and connect with each other .
it does n't matter the technology .
and the second is that people seem to be experiencing an actual connection .
it was n't a virtual choir .
there are people now online that are friends ; they 've never met .
but , i know myself too , i feel this virtual esprit de corps , if you will , with all of them .
i feel a closeness to this choir -- almost like a family .
what i 'd like to close with then today is the first look at " sleep " by virtual choir 2.0 .
this will be a premiere today .
we 're not finished with the video yet .
you can imagine , with 2,000 synchronized youtube videos , the render time is just atrocious .
but we do have the first three minutes .
and it 's a tremendous honor for me to be able to show it to you here first .
you 're the very first people to see this .
this is " sleep , " the virtual choir .
virtual choir : ♫ the evening hangs ♫ ♫ beneath the moon ♫ ♫ a silver thread on darkened dune ♫ ♫ with closing eyes and resting head ♫ ♫ i know that sleep is coming soon ♫ ♫ upon my pillow , ♫ ♫ safe in bed , ♫ ♫ a thousand pictures fill my head ♫ ♫ i cannot sleep ♫ ♫ my mind 's aflight ♫ ♫ and yet my limbs seem made of lead ♫ ♫ if there are noises in the night ♫ eric whitacre : thank you very , very much . thank you .
thank you very much . thank you . thank you .
