i thought i would talk a little bit about how nature makes materials .
i brought along with me an abalone shell .
this abalone shell is a biocomposite material that 's 98 percent by mass calcium carbonate and two percent by mass protein .
yet , it 's 3,000 times tougher than its geological counterpart .
and a lot of people might use structures like abalone shells , like chalk .
i 've been fascinated by how nature makes materials , and there 's a lot of sequence to how they do such an exquisite job .
part of it is that these materials are macroscopic in structure , but they 're formed at the nanoscale .
they 're formed at the nanoscale , and they use proteins that are coded by the genetic level that allow them to build these really exquisite structures .
so something i think is very fascinating is what if you could give life to non - living structures , like batteries and like solar cells ?
what if they had some of the same capabilities that an abalone shell did , in terms of being able to build really exquisite structures at room temperature and room pressure , using non - toxic chemicals and adding no toxic materials back into the environment ?
so that 's the vision that i 've been thinking about .
and so what if you could grow a battery in a petri dish ?
or , what if you could give genetic information to a battery so that it could actually become better as a function of time , and do so in an environmentally friendly way ?
and so , going back to this abalone shell , besides being nano - structured , one thing that 's fascinating , is when a male and a female abalone get together , they pass on the genetic information that says , " this is how to build an exquisite material .
here 's how to do it at room temperature and pressure , using non - toxic materials . " same with diatoms , which are shown right here , which are glasseous structures .
every time the diatoms replicate , they give the genetic information that says , " here 's how to build glass in the ocean that 's perfectly nano - structured .
and you can do it the same , over and over again . " so what if you could do the same thing with a solar cell or a battery ?
i like to say my favorite biomaterial is my four year - old .
but anyone who 's ever had , or knows , small children knows they 're incredibly complex organisms .
and so if you wanted to convince them to do something they do n't want to do , it 's very difficult .
so when we think about future technologies , we actually think of using bacteria and virus , simple organisms .
can you convince them to work with a new toolbox , so that they can build a structure that will be important to me ?
also , when we think about future technologies ,
we start with the beginning of earth .
basically , it took a billion years to have life on earth .
and very rapidly , they became multi - cellular , they could replicate , they could use photosynthesis as a way of getting their energy source .
but it was n't until about 500 million years ago -- during the cambrian geologic time period -- that organisms in the ocean started making hard materials .
before that , they were all soft , fluffy structures .
and it was during this time that there was increased calcium and iron and silicon in the environment ,
and organisms learned how to make hard materials .
and so that 's what i would like be able to do -- convince biology to work with the rest of the periodic table .
now if you look at biology , there 's many structures like dna and antibodies and proteins and ribosomes that you 've heard about that are already nano - structured .
so nature already gives us really exquisite structures on the nanoscale .
what if we could harness them and convince them to not be an antibody that does something like hiv ?
but what if we could convince them to build a solar cell for us ?
so here are some examples : these are some natural shells .
there are natural biological materials .
the abalone shell here -- and if you fracture it , you can look at the fact that it 's nano - structured .
there 's diatoms made out of sio 2 , and they 're magnetotactic bacteria that make small , single - domain magnets used for navigation .
what all these have in common is these materials are structured at the nanoscale , and they have a dna sequence that codes for a protein sequence that gives them the blueprint to be able to build these really wonderful structures .
now , going back to the abalone shell , the abalone makes this shell by having these proteins .
these proteins are very negatively charged .
and they can pull calcium out of the environment , put down a layer of calcium and then carbonate , calcium and carbonate .
it has the chemical sequences of amino acids , which says , " this is how to build the structure .
here 's the dna sequence , here 's the protein sequence in order to do it . " and so an interesting idea is , what if you could take any material that you wanted , or any element on the periodic table , and find its corresponding dna sequence , then code it for a corresponding protein sequence to build a structure , but not build an abalone shell -- build something that , through nature , it has never had the opportunity to work with yet .
and so here 's the periodic table .
and i absolutely love the periodic table .
every year for the incoming freshman class at mit , i have a periodic table made that says , " welcome to mit . now you 're in your element . "
and you flip it over , and it 's the amino acids with the ph at which they have different charges .
and so i give this out to thousands of people .
and i know it says mit , and this is caltech , but i have a couple extra if people want it .
and i was really fortunate to have president obama visit my lab this year on his visit to mit , and i really wanted to give him a periodic table .
so i stayed up at night , and i talked to my husband , " how do i give president obama a periodic table ?
what if he says , ' oh , i already have one , ' or , ' i 've already memorized it ' ? "
and so he came to visit my lab and looked around -- it was a great visit .
and then afterward , i said , " sir , i want to give you the periodic table in case you 're ever in a bind and need to calculate molecular weight . " and i thought molecular weight sounded much less nerdy than molar mass.
and so he looked at it , and he said , " thank you . i 'll look at it periodically . "
and later in a lecture that he gave on clean energy , he pulled it out and said , " and people at mit , they give out periodic tables . "
so basically what i did n't tell you is that about 500 million years ago , organisms starter making materials , but it took them about 50 million years to get good at it .
it took them about 50 million years to learn how to perfect how to make that abalone shell .
and that 's a hard sell to a graduate student .
" i have this great project -- 50 million years . " and so we had to develop a way of trying to do this more rapidly .
and so we use a virus that 's a non - toxic virus called m 13 bacteriophage that 's job is to infect bacteria .
well it has a simple dna structure that you can go in and cut and paste additional dna sequences into it .
and by doing that , it allows the virus to express random protein sequences .
and this is pretty easy biotechnology .
and you could basically do this a billion times .
and so you can go in and have a billion different viruses that are all genetically identical , but they differ from each other based on their tips , on one sequence that codes for one protein .
now if you take all billion viruses , and you can put them in one drop of liquid , you can force them to interact with anything you want on the periodic table .
and through a process of selection evolution , you can pull one out of a billion that does something that you 'd like it to do , like grow a battery or grow a solar cell .
so basically , viruses ca n't replicate themselves ; they need a host .
once you find that one out of a billion , you infect it into a bacteria , and you make millions and billions of copies of that particular sequence .
and so the other thing that 's beautiful about biology is that biology gives you really exquisite structures with nice link scales .
and these viruses are long and skinny , and we can get them to express the ability to grow something like semiconductors or materials for batteries .
now this is a high - powered battery that we grew in my lab.
we engineered a virus to pick up carbon nanotubes .
so one part of the virus grabs a carbon nanotube .
the other part of the virus has a sequence that can grow an electrode material for a battery .
and then it wires itself to the current collector .
and so through a process of selection evolution , we went from being able to have a virus that made a crummy battery to a virus that made a good battery to a virus that made a record - breaking , high - powered battery that 's all made at room temperature , basically at the bench top .
and that battery went to the white house for a press conference .
i brought it here .
you can see it in this case -- that 's lighting this led .
now if we could scale this , you could actually use it to run your prius , which is my dream -- to be able to drive a virus - powered car .
but it 's basically -- you can pull one out of a billion .
you can make lots of amplifications to it . basically , you make an amplification in the lab ,
and then you get it to self - assemble into a structure like a battery .
we 're able to do this also with catalysis .
this is the example of photocatalytic splitting of water .
and what we 've been able to do is engineer a virus to basically take dye - absorbing molecules and line them up on the surface of the virus so it acts as an antenna , and you get an energy transfer across the virus .
and then we give it a second gene to grow an inorganic material that can be used to split water into oxygen and hydrogen that can be used for clean fuels .
and i brought an example with me of that today .
my students promised me it would work .
these are virus - assembled nanowires .
when you shine light on them , you can see them bubbling .
in this case , you 're seeing oxygen bubbles come out .
and basically , by controlling the genes , you can control multiple materials to improve your device performance .
the last example are solar cells .
you can also do this with solar cells .
we 've been able to engineer viruses to pick up carbon nanotubes and then grow titanium dioxide around them -- and use as a way of getting electrons through the device .
and what we 've found is through genetic engineering , we can actually increase the efficiencies of these solar cells to record numbers for these types of dye - sensitized systems .
and i brought one of those as well that you can play around with outside afterward .
so this is a virus - based solar cell .
through evolution and selection , we took it from an eight percent efficiency solar cell to an 11 percent efficiency solar cell .
so i hope that i 've convinced you that there 's a lot of great , interesting things to be learned about how nature makes materials -- and taking it the next step to see if you can force , or whether you can take advantage of how nature makes materials , to make things that nature has n't yet dreamed of making .
thank you .
