i 'm going to talk about a very fundamental change that is going on in the very fabric of the modern economy .
and to talk about that , i 'm going to go back to the beginning , because in the beginning were commodities .
commodities are things that you grow in the ground , raise on the ground or pull out of the ground : basically , animal , mineral , vegetable .
and then you extract them out of the ground , and sell them on the open marketplace .
commodities were the basis of the agrarian economy that lasted for millennia .
but then along came the industrial revolution , and then goods became the predominant economic offering , where we used commodities as a raw material to be able to make or manufacture goods .
so , we moved from an agrarian economy to an industrial economy .
well , what then happened over the last 50 or 60 years , is that goods have become commoditized .
commoditized : where they 're treated like a commodity , where people do n't care who makes them .
they just care about three things and three things only : price , price and price .
now , there 's an antidote to commoditization , and that is customization .
my first book was called " mass customization " -- it came up a couple of times yesterday -- and how i discovered this progression of economic value was realizing that customizing a good automatically turned it into a service , because it was done just for a particular person , because it was n't inventoried , it was delivered on demand to that individual person .
so , we moved from an industrial economy to a service - based economy .
but over the past 10 or 20 years , what 's happened is that services are being commoditized as well .
long - distance telephone service sold on price , price , price ; fast - food restaurants with all their value pricing ; and even the internet is commoditizing not just goods , but services as well .
what that means is that it 's time to move to a new level of economic value .
time to go beyond the goods and the services , and use , in that same heuristic , what happens when you customize a service ?
what happens when you design a service that is so appropriate for a particular person -- that 's exactly what they need at this moment in time ?
then you ca n't help but make them go " wow " ; you ca n't help but turn it into a memorable event -- you ca n't help but turn it into an experience .
so we 're shifting to an experience economy , where experiences are becoming the predominant economic offering .
now most places that i talk to , when i talk about experience , i talk about disney -- the world 's premier experience - stager .
i talk about theme restaurants , and experiential retail , and boutique hotels , and las vegas -- the experience capital of the world .
but here , when you think about experiences , think about thomas dolby and his group , playing music .
think about meaningful places .
think about drinking wine , about a journey to the clock of the long now .
those are all experiences . think about ted itself .
the experience capital in the world of conferences .
all of these are experiences .
now , over the last several years i spent a lot of time in europe , and particularly in the netherlands , and whenever i talk about the experience economy there , i 'm always greeted at the end with one particular question , almost invariably .
and the question is n't really so much a question as an accusation .
and the dutch , when they usually put it , it always starts with the same two words .
you know the words i mean ?
you americans .
they say , you americans .
you like your fantasy environments , your fake , your disneyland experiences .
they say , we dutch , we like real , natural , authentic experiences .
so much has that happened that i 've developed a fairly praticed response , which is : i point out that first of all , you have to understand that there is no such thing as an inauthentic experience .
why ? because the experience happens inside of us .
it 's our reaction to the events that are staged in front of us .
so , as long as we are in any sense authentic human beings , then every experience we have is authentic .
now , there may be more or less natural or artificial stimuli for the experience , but even that is a matter of degree , not kind .
and there 's no such thing as a 100 percent natural experience .
even if you go for a walk in the proverbial woods , there is a company that manufactured the car that delivered you to the edge of the woods ; there 's a company that manufactured the shoes that you have to protect yourself from the ground of the woods .
there 's a company that provides a cell phone service you have in case you get lost in the woods .
right ? all of those are man - made , artificiality brought into the woods by you , and by the very nature of being there .
and then i always finish off by talking about -- the thing that amazes me the most about this question , particularly coming from the dutch , is that the netherlands is every bit as manufactured as disneyland .
and the dutch , they always go ...
and they realize , i 'm right !
there is n't a square meter of ground in the entire country that has n't been reclaimed from the sea , or otherwise moved , modified and manicured to look as if it had always been there .
it 's the only place you ever go for a walk in the woods and all the trees are lined up in rows .
but nonetheless , not just the dutch , but everyone has this desire for the authentic .
and authenticity is therefore becoming the new consumer sensibility -- the buying criteria by which consumers are choosing who are they going to buy from , and what they 're going to buy .
becoming the basis of the economy .
in fact , you can look at how each of these economies developed , that each one has their own business imperative , matched with a consumer sensibility .
we 're the agrarian economy , and we 're supplying commodities .
it 's about supply and availability .
getting the commodities to market .
with the industrial economy , it is about controlling costs -- getting the costs down as low as possible so we can offer them to the masses .
with the service economy , it is about improving quality .
that has -- the whole quality movement has risen with the service economy over the past 20 or 30 years .
and now , with the experience economy , it 's about rendering authenticity .
rendering authenticity -- and the keyword is " rendering . "
right ? rendering , because you have to get your consumers -- as business people -- to percieve your offerings as authentic .
because there is a basic paradox : no one can have an inauthentic experience , but no business can supply one .
because all businesses are man - made objects ; all business is involved with money ; all business is a matter of using machinery , and all those things make something inauthentic .
so , how do you render authenticity , is the question .
are you rendering authenticity ?
when you think about that , let me go back to what lionel trilling , in his seminal book on authenticity , " sincerity and authenticity " -- came out in 1960 -- points to as the seminal point at which authenticity entered the lexicon , if you will .
and that is , to no surprise , in shakespeare , and in his play , hamlet .
and there is one part in this play , hamlet , where the most fake of all the characters in hamlet , polonius , says something profoundly real .
at the end of a laundry list of advice he 's giving to his son , laertes , he says this : and this above all : to thine own self be true . and it doth follow , as night the day , that thou canst not then be false to any man .
and those three verses are the core of authenticity .
there are two dimensions to authenticity : one , being true to yourself , which is very self - directed .
two , is other - directed : being what you say you are to others .
and i do n't know about you , but whenever i encounter two dimensions , i immediately go , ahh , two - by - two !
all right ? anybody else like that , no ?
well , if you think about that , you do , in fact , get a two - by - two .
where , on one dimension it 's a matter of being true to yourself .
as businesses , are the economic offerings you are providing -- are they true to themselves ?
and the other dimension is : are they what they say they are to others ?
if not , you have , " is not true to itself , " and " is not what it says it is , " yielding a two - by - two matrix .
and of course , if you are both true to yourself , and are what you say you are , then you 're real real !
the opposite , of course , is -- fake fake .
all right , now , there is value for fake .
there will always be companies around to supply the fake , because there will always be desire for the fake .
fact is , there 's a general rule : if you do n't like it , it 's fake ; if you do like it , it 's faux .
now , the other two sides of the coin are : being a real fake -- is what it says it is , but is not true to itself , or being a fake real : is true to itself , but not what it says it is .
you can think about those two -- you know , both of these better than being fake fake -- not quite as good as being real real .
you can contrast them by thinking about universal city walk versus disney world , or disneyland .
universal city walk is a real fake -- in fact , we got this very term from ada louise huxtable 's book , " the unreal america . " a wonderful book , where she talks about universal city walk as -- you know , she decries the fake , but she says , at least that 's a real fake , right , because you can see behind the facade , right ?
it is what it says it is : it 's universal studio ; it 's in the city of los angeles ; you 're going to walk a lot .
right ? you do n't tend to walk a lot in los angeles , well , here 's a place where you are going to walk a lot , outside in this city .
but is it really true to itself ?
right ? is it really in the city ?
is it -- you can see behind all of it , and see what is going on in the facades of it .
so she calls it a real fake .
disney world , on the other hand , is a fake real , or a fake reality .
right ? it 's not what it says it is . it 's not really the magic kingdom .
but it is -- oh , i 'm sorry , i did n't mean to -- -- sorry .
we wo n't talk about santa claus then .
but disney world is wonderfully true to itself .
right ? just wonderfully true to itself .
when you are there you are just immersed in this wonderful environment .
so , it 's a fake real .
now the easiest way to fall down in this , and not be real real , right , the easiest way not to be true to yourself is not to understand your heritage , and thereby repudiate that heritage .
right , the key of being true to yourself is knowing who you are as a business .
knowing where your heritage is : what you have done in the past .
and what you have done in the past limits what you can do , what you can get away with , essentially , in the future .
so , you have to understand that past .
think about disney again .
disney , 10 or 15 years ago , right , the disney -- the company that is probably best - known for family values out there , disney bought the abc network .
the abc network , affectionately known in the trade as the t&a network , right -- that 's not too much jargon , is it ?
right , the t&a network . then it bought miramax , known for its nc - 17 fare , and all of a sudden , families everywhere could n't really trust what they were getting from disney .
it was no longer true to its heritage ; no longer true to walt disney .
that 's one of the reasons why they 're having such trouble today , and why roy disney is out to get michael eisner .
because it is no longer true to itself .
so , understand what -- your past limits what you can do in the future .
when it comes to being what you say you are , the easiest mistake that companies make is that they advertise things that they are not .
that 's when you 're perceived as fake , as a phony company -- advertizing things that you 're not .
think about any hotel , any airline , any hospital .
right , if you could check into the ads , you 'd have a great experience .
but unfortunately , you have to experience the actual hotel , airline and hospital , and then you have that disconnect .
then you have that perception that you are phony .
so , the number one thing to do when it comes to being what you say you are , is to provide places for people to experience who you are .
for people to experience who you are .
right , it 's not advertising does it .
that 's why you have companies like starbucks , right , that does n't advertise at all .
they said , you want to know who we are , you have to come experience us .
and think about the economic value they have provided by that experience .
right ? coffee , at its core , is what ?
right ? it 's beans ; right ? it 's coffee beans .
you know how much coffee is worth , when treated as a commodity as a bean ?
two or three cents per cup -- that 's what coffee is worth .
but grind it , roast it , package it , put it on a grocery store shelf , and now it 'll cost five , 10 , 15 cents , when you treat it as a good .
take that same good , and perform the service of actually brewing it for a customer , in a corner diner , in a bodega , a kiosk somewhere , you get 50 cents , maybe a buck per cup of coffee .
but surround the brewing of that coffee with the ambiance of a starbucks , with the authentic cedar that goes inside of there , and now , because of that authentic experience , you can charge two , three , four , five dollars for a cup of coffee .
so , authenticity is becoming the new consumer sensibility .
let me summarize it , for the business people in the audience , with three rules , three basic rules .
one , do n't say you 're authentic unless you really are authentic .
two , it 's easier to be authentic if you do n't say you 're authentic .
and three , if you say you 're authentic , you better be authentic .
and then for the consumers , for everyone else in the audience , let me simply summarize it by saying , increasingly , what we -- what will make us happy , is spending our time and our money satisfying the desire for authenticity .
thank you .
