it 's great being here at ted .
you know , i think there might be some presentations that will go over my head , but the most amazing concepts are the ones that go right under my feet .
the little things in life , sometimes that we forget about , like pollination , that we take for granted .
and you ca n't tell the story about pollinators -- bees , bats , hummingbirds , butterflies -- without telling the story about the invention of flowers and how they co - evolved over 50 million years .
i 've been filming time - lapse flowers 24 hours a day , seven days a week , for over 35 years .
to watch them move is a dance i 'm never going to get tired of .
it fills me with wonder , and it opens my heart .
beauty and seduction , i believe , is nature 's tool for survival , because we will protect what we fall in love with .
their relationship is a love story that feeds the earth .
it reminds us that we are a part of nature , and we 're not separate from it .
when i heard about the vanishing bees , colony collapse disorder , it motivated me to take action .
we depend on pollinators for over a third of the fruits and vegetables we eat .
and many scientists believe it 's the most serious issue facing mankind .
it 's like the canary in the coalmine .
if they disappear , so do we .
it reminds us that we are a part of nature and we need to take care of it .
what motivated me to film their behavior was something that i asked my scientific advisers : " what motivates the pollinators ? "
well , their answer was , " it 's all about risk and reward . "
like a wide - eyed kid , i 'd say , " why is that ? "
and they 'd say , " well , because they want to survive . "
i go , " why ? "
" well , in order to reproduce . "
" well , why ? "
and i thought that they 'd probably say , " well , it 's all about sex . "
and chip taylor , our monarch butterfly expert , he replied , " nothing lasts forever .
everything in the universe wears out . "
and that blew my mind .
because i realized that nature had invented reproduction as a mechanism for life to move forward , as a life force that passes right through us and makes us a link in the evolution of life .
rarely seen by the naked eye , this intersection between the animal world and the plant world is truly a magic moment .
it 's the mystical moment where life regenerates itself , over and over again .
so here is some nectar from my film .
i hope you 'll drink , tweet and plant some seeds to pollinate a friendly garden .
and always take time to smell the flowers , and let it fill you with beauty , and rediscover that sense of wonder .
here are some images from the film .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
