i want to talk to you about something kind of big .
we 'll start here .
65 million years ago the dinosaurs had a bad day .
a chunk of rock six miles across , moving something like 50 times the speed of a rifle bullet , slammed into the earth .
it released its energy all at once , and it was an explosion that was mind - numbing .
if you took every nuclear weapon ever built at the height of the cold war , lumped them together and blew them up at the same time , that would be one one - millionth of the energy released at that moment .
the dinosaurs had a really bad day .
okay ?
now , a six - mile - wide rock is very large .
we all live here in boulder .
if you look out your window and you can see long 's peak , you 're probably familiar with it .
now , scoop up long 's peak , and put it out in space .
take meeker , mt. meeker . lump that in there , and put that in space as well , and mt. everest , and k 2 , and the indian peaks .
then you 're starting to get an idea of how much rock we 're talking about , okay ?
we know it was that big because of the impact it had and the crater it left .
it hit in what we now know as yucatan , the gulf of mexico .
you can see here , there 's the yucatan peninsula , if you recognize cozumel off the east coast there .
here is how big of a crater was left .
it was huge . to give you a sense of the scale , okay , there you go . the scale here is 50 miles on top , a hundred kilometers on the bottom . this thing was 300 kilometers across -- 200 miles -- an enormous crater that excavated out vast amounts of earth that splashed around the globe and set fires all over the planet , threw up enough dust to block out the sun.
it wiped out 75 percent of all species on earth .
now , not all asteroids are that big .
some of them are smaller .
here is one that came in over the united states in october of 1992 .
it came in on a friday night .
why is that important ?
because back then , video cameras were just starting to become popular , and people would bring them , parents would bring them , to their kids ' football games to film their kids play football . and since this came in on a friday , they were able to get this great footage of this thing breaking up as it came in over west virgina , maryland , pennsylvania and new jersey until it did that to a car in new york .
now , this is not a 200 - mile - wide crater , but then again you can see the rock which is sitting right here , about the size of a football , that hit that car and did that damage .
now this thing was probably about the size of a school bus when it first came in .
it broke up through atmospheric pressure , it crumbled , and then the pieces fell apart and did some damage .
now , you would n't want that falling on your foot or your head , because it would do that to it .
that would be bad .
but it wo n't wipe out , you know , all life on earth , so that 's fine . but it turns out , you do n't need something six miles across to do a lot of damage .
there is a median point between tiny rock and gigantic rock , and in fact , if any of you have ever been to near winslow , arizona , there is a crater in the desert there that is so iconic that it is actually called meteor crater .
to give you a sense of scale , this is about a mile wide .
if you look up at the top , that 's a parking lot , and those are recreational vehicles right there .
so it 's about a mile across , 600 feet deep .
the object that formed this was probably about 30 to 50 yards across , so roughly the size of mackey auditorium here .
it came in at speeds that were tremendous , slammed into the ground , blew up , and exploded with the energy of roughly a 20 - megaton nuclear bomb -- a very hefty bomb .
this was 50,000 years ago , so it may have wiped out a few buffalo or antelope , or something like that out in the desert , but it probably would not have caused global devastation .
it turns out that these things do n't have to hit the ground to do a lot of damage .
now , in 1908 , over siberia , near the tunguska region -- for those of you who are dan aykroyd fans and saw " ghostbusters , " when he talked about the greatest cross - dimensional rift since the siberia blast of 1909 , where he got the date wrong , but that 's okay .
it was 1908 . that 's fine . i can live with that .
another rock came into the earth 's atmosphere and this one blew up above the ground , several miles up above the surface of the earth .
the heat from the explosion set fire to the forest below it , and then the shock wave came down and knocked down trees for hundreds of square miles , okay ?
this did a huge amount of damage .
and again , this was a rock probably roughly the size of this auditorium that we 're sitting in .
in meteor crater it was made of metal , and metal is much tougher , so it made it to the ground .
the one over tunguska was probably made of rock , and that 's much more crumbly , so it blew up in the air . either way , these are tremendous explosions , 20 megatons .
now , when these things blow up , they 're not going to do global ecological damage .
they 're not going to do something like the dinosaur - killer did .
they 're just not big enough .
but they will do global economic damage , because they do n't have to hit , necessarily , to do this kind of damage .
they do n't have to do global devastation .
if one of these things were to hit pretty much anywhere , it would cause a panic .
but if it came over a city , an important city -- not that any city is more important than others , but some of them we depend on them more on the global economic basis -- that could do a huge amount of damage to us as a civilization .
so , now that i 've scared the crap out of you ...
what can we do about this ? all right ?
this is a potential threat .
let me note that we have not had a giant impact like the dinosaur - killer for 65 million years . they 're very rare .
the smaller ones happen more often , but probably on the order of a millennium , every few centuries or every few thousand years , but it 's still something to be aware of .
well , what do we do about them ?
the first thing we have to do is find them .
this is an image of an asteroid that passed us in 2009 .
it 's right here .
but you can see that it 's extremely faint .
i do n't even know if you can see that in the back row . these are just stars .
this is a rock that was about 30 yards across , so roughly the size of the ones that blew up over tunguska and hit arizona 50,000 years ago .
these things are faint .
they 're hard to see , and the sky is really big .
we have to find these things first .
well the good news is , we 're looking for them .
nasa has devoted money to this .
the national science foundation , other countries are very interested in doing this .
we 're building telescopes that are looking for the threat . that 's a great first step , but what 's the second step ? the second step is that we see one heading toward us , we have to stop it . what do we do ?
you 've probably heard about the asteroid apophis . if you have n't yet , you will .
if you 've heard about the mayan 2012 apocalypse , you 're going to hear about apophis , because you 're keyed in to all the doomsday networks anyway .
apophis is an asteroid that was discovered in 2004 .
it 's roughly 250 yards across , so it 's pretty big -- big size , you know , bigger than a football stadium -- and it 's going to pass by the earth in april of 2029 .
and it 's going to pass us so close that it 's actually going to come underneath our weather satellites .
the earth 's gravity is going to bend the orbit of this thing so much that if it 's just right , if it passes through this region of space , this kidney bean - shaped region called the keyhole , the earth 's gravity will bend it just enough that seven years later on april 13 , which is a friday , i 'll note , in the year 2036 ...
-- you ca n't plan that kind of stuff -- apophis is going to hit us . and it 's 250 meters across , so it would do unbelievable damage .
now the good news is that the odds of it actually passing through this keyhole and hitting us next go - around are one in a million , roughly -- very , very low odds , so i personally am not lying awake at night worrying about this at all .
i do n't think apophis is a problem .
in fact , apophis is a blessing in disguise , because it woke us up to the dangers of these things .
this thing was discovered just a few years ago and could hit us a few years from now .
it wo n't , but it gives us a chance to study these kinds of asteroids . we did n't really necessarily understand these keyholes , and now we do and it turns out that 's really important , because how do you stop an asteroid like this ?
well , let me ask you , what happens if you 're standing in the middle of the road and a car 's headed for you ? what do you do ? you do this .
right ? move . the car goes past you .
but we ca n't move the earth , at least not easily , but we can move a small asteroid .
and it turns out , we 've even done it .
in the year 2005 , nasa launched a probe called deep impact , which slammed into -- slammed a piece of itself into the nucleus of a comet .
comets are very much like asteroids .
the purpose was n't to push it out of the way .
the purpose was to make a crater to excavate the material and see what was underneath the surface of this comet , which we learned quite a bit about .
we did move the comet a little tiny bit , not very much , but that was n't the point .
however , think about this .
this thing is orbiting the sun at 10 miles per second , 20 miles per second .
we shot a space probe at it and hit it . okay ?
imagine how hard that must be , and we did it .
that means we can do it again .
if we need , if we see an asteroid that 's coming toward us , and it 's headed right for us , and we have two years to go , boom ! we hit it .
you can try to -- you know , if you watch the movies , you might think about , why do n't we use a nuclear weapon ?
it 's like , well , you can try that , but the problem is timing .
you shoot a nuclear weapon at this thing , you have to blow it up within a few milliseconds of tolerance or else you 'll just miss it .
and there are a lot of other problems with that . it 's very hard to do .
but just hitting something ? that 's pretty easy .
i think even nasa can do that , and they proved that they can .
the problem is , what happens if you hit this asteroid , you 've changed the orbit , you measure the orbit and then you find out , oh , yeah , we just pushed it into a keyhole , and now it 's going to hit us in three years .
well , my opinion is , fine . okay ?
it 's not hitting us in six months . that 's good .
now we have three years to do something else .
and you can hit it again . that 's kind of ham - fisted . you might just push it into a third keyhole or whatever , so you do n't do that .
and this is the part , it 's the part i just love .
after the big macho " rrrrrrr bam ! we 're gonna hit this thing in the face , " then we bring in the velvet gloves .
there 's a group of scientists and engineers and astronauts and they call themselves the b 612 foundation . for those of you who 've read " the little prince , " you understand that reference , i hope . the little prince who lived on an asteroid , it was called b 612 .
these are smart guys -- men and women -- astronauts , like i said , engineers .
rusty schweickart , who was an apollo 9 astronaut , is on this . dan durda , my friend who made this image , works here at on walnut street . he created this image for this , and he 's actually one of the astronomers who works for them . if we see an asteroid that 's going to hit the earth and we have enough time , we can hit it to move it into a better orbit . but then what we do is we launch a probe that has to weigh a ton or two .
it does n't have to be huge -- couple of tons , not that big -- and you park it near the asteroid .
you do n't land on it , because these things are tumbling end over end . it 's very hard to land on them .
instead you get near it .
the gravity of the asteroid pulls on the probe , and the probe has a couple of tons of mass.
it has a little tiny bit of gravity , but it 's enough that it can pull the asteroid , and you have your rockets set up , so you can -- oh , you can barely see it here , but there 's rocket plumes -- and you basically , these guys are connected by their own gravity , and if you move the probe very slowly , very , very gently , you can very easily finesse that rock into a safe orbit .
you can even put in orbit around the earth where we could mine it , although that 's a whole other thing . i wo n't go into that .
but we 'd be rich !
so think about this , right ?
there are these giant rocks flying out there , and they 're hitting us , and they 're doing damage to us , but we 've figured out how to do this , and all the pieces are in place to do this .
we have astronomers in place with telescopes looking for them . we have smart people , very , very smart people , who are concerned about this and figuring out how to fix the problem , and we have the technology to do this .
this probe actually ca n't use chemical rockets .
chemical rockets provide too much thrust , too much push . the probe would just shoot away .
we invented something called an ion drive , which is a very , very , very low - thrust engine .
it generates the force a piece of paper would have on your hand , incredibly light , but it can run for months and years , providing that very gentle push .
if anybody here is a fan of the original " star trek , " they ran across an alien ship that had an ion drive , and spock said , " they 're very technically sophisticated .
they 're a hundred years ahead of us with this drive . "
yeah , we have an ion drive now .
we do n't have the enterprise , but we 've got an ion drive now .
spock .
so ...
that 's the difference , that 's the difference between us and the dinosaurs .
this happened to them .
it does n't have to happen to us .
the difference between the dinosaurs and us is that we have a space program and we can vote , and so we can change our future .
we have the ability to change our future .
65 million years from now , we do n't have to have our bones collecting dust in a museum .
thank you very much .
