♫ you 're older than you 've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older . ♫ ♫ you 're older than you 've even been ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're older still . ♫ ♫ time ♫ ♫ is marching on ♫ ♫ and time ♫ ♫ is still marching on . ♫ ♫ this day will soon be at an end ♫ ♫ and now it 's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it 's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it 's even sooner . ♫ ♫ this day will soon be at an end ♫ ♫ and now it 's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it 's sooner still . ♫ ♫ you 're older than you 've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older . ♫ ♫ you 're older than you 've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you 're even older ♫ ♫ and now you 're older still . ♫ thank you very much .
good morning everybody .
we are they might be giants .
i am wearing the al gore in - ear monitors he wore on the larry king show and i 'm hearing that transmission and not mine .
but i guess that 's in keeping , so now we 'll just move to the powerpoint presentation , ladies and gentlemen .
this is a brand new song .
in the spirit of ted , we 're bringing you something that has not been released .
john , do you want to introduce the song ?
this is a song about a creature called a hummingbird moth which imitates another creature which imitates yet another creature .
it 's completely fucked up and can only be explained in song .
♫ everyone is crying at the dread hypnotic flying ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ you ca n't walk , you ca n't ramble ♫ ♫ ' cause you 're gonna have to scramble ♫ ♫ from the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ catbird is a cat ♫ ♫ but he 's got bugness in his veins . ♫ ♫ manhouse lives within himself ♫ ♫ with thoughtful human brains . ♫ ♫ neither one is equal ♫ ♫ to the challenge of the freak we 'll call ♫ ♫ the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ now the moth ♫ ♫ defeats the mouse and man . ♫ ♫ it 's messing with the plan . ♫ ♫ it ca n't be believed ♫ ♫ ' cause it 's just a hummingbird moth ♫ ♫ who 's acting like the bird ♫ ♫ that thinks it 's a bee . ♫ ♫ got a brand new shipment ♫ ♫ of electrical equipment ♫ ♫ it 's addressed to the bottom of the sea . ♫ ♫ send a tangerine - colored ♫ ♫ nuclear submarine ♫ ♫ with a sticker that says stp . ♫ ♫ windshield wiper washer fluid ♫ ♫ spraying in the air ... ♫ ♫ headlights under head lice ♫ ♫ under hats lie everywhere . ♫ ♫ subatomic waves ♫ ♫ to the underwater caves ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ now the moth defeats the mouse and man . ♫ ♫ it 's messing with the plan . ♫ ♫ it ca n't be believed ♫ ♫ ' cause it 's just a hummingbird moth ♫ ♫ who 's acting like a bird ♫ ♫ that thinks it 's a bee . ♫ ♫ is it us or is this messed up ? ♫ ♫ everyone 's deforming ♫ ♫ in the presence of the swarming ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ protozoa , snakes and horses ♫ ♫ have enlisted in the forces ♫ ♫ of the bee of bird of the moth . ♫ ♫ catbug is a cat ♫ ♫ but he 's got bugness in his veins . ♫ ♫ manhouse lives within himself ♫ ♫ with thoughtful human brains . ♫ ♫ neither one is equal ♫ ♫ to the challenge of the freak we 'll call ♫ ♫ the bee of the bird of the moth . ♫ thanks a lot .
thank you very much .
so we are past our 1,000th show .
probably somewhere around 1,500 .
it 's hard to know .
we 've only done two shows in 2007 so far , but our first show was actually the coldest performance we 've ever had .
it was 19 degrees in st. louis about a month ago and i 'm happy to report that this performance you are seeing today is the earliest we have ever performed .
so thank you .
we are cultural test pilots , ladies and gentlemen .
how early can a rock performance begin ?
not all the facts are in about performing at 8.30 in the morning .
i can tell you the 19 degree thing was fantastic .
all right .
so we do n't know that much about the history of violinists but we do know that when we entered the state of new jersey there is an uptick in violence .
this song is called " asbury park . "
it 's based on a real life experience .
♫ i ♫ ♫ i got ♫ ♫ i got kicked ♫ ♫ i got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the stone . ♫ ♫ stone pone . ♫ ♫ stone pony . ♫ ♫ i got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the stone pony ♫ ♫ where i swore to the guy ♫ ♫ that the guy who took his beer was n't me . ♫ ♫ me got ♫ ♫ me got kicked ♫ ♫ me got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the stone . ♫ ♫ stone pone . ♫ ♫ stone pony . ♫ ♫ me got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the stone pony ♫ ♫ where i swore to the guy ♫ ♫ that the guy who took his beer ♫ ♫ was a guy dressed like me . ♫ ♫ not me ! ♫ ♫ not me ! ♫ ♫ not me ! ♫ thank you .
marty beller on the drums over there .
we want to get in as many songs as possible during our brief time here so this is the one to play .
this song is called " fingertips . "
♫ everything is catching on fire ♫ ♫ yes , everything is catching on fire ♫ ♫ yes , everything is catching on fire . ♫ ♫ fingertips ♫ ♫ fingertips ♫ ♫ fingertips ♫ ♫ i hear the wind blow ♫ ♫ i hear the wind blow ♫ ♫ it seems to say ♫ ♫ hello ♫ ♫ hello ♫ ♫ i 'm the one who loves you so . ♫ ♫ hey , now everybody , now . ♫ ♫ hey , now everybody ♫ ♫ hey , now everybody , now ♫ ♫ who 's that standing ♫ ♫ at the window ? ♫ ♫ i found a new friend ♫ ♫ underneath my pillow . ♫ ♫ come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ are n't you the guy who hit me in the eye ? ♫ ♫ are n't you the guy who hit me in the eye ? ♫ ♫ please pass the milk , please . ♫ ♫ please pass the milk , please . ♫ ♫ please pass the milk , please . ♫ ♫ leave me alone , leave me alone . ♫ ♫ who 's knocking on the wall ? ♫ ♫ all alone , all alone . ♫ ♫ all by myself . ♫ ♫ what 's that blue thing doing here ? ♫ ♫ something grabbed ahold of my hand ♫ ♫ i did n't know what had my hand ♫ ♫ but that 's when all my troubles began . ♫ ♫ i do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i cannot understand you ♫ ♫ i cannot understand you ♫ ♫ i do n't understand the things you say ♫ ♫ i ca n't understand a single word ♫ ♫ i do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i just do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i do not understand you ♫ ♫ do n't understand you ♫ ♫ do n't understand you ♫ ♫ i turn around ♫ ♫ see the sound ♫ ♫ turn around and see the thing ♫ ♫ that made the sound . ♫ ♫ mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ the day that love came to play . ♫ ♫ i 'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ i 'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ i 'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ i 'm having a ... ♫ ♫ fingertips ♫ ♫ fingertips ♫ ♫ i walk along darkened corridors ♫ ♫ and i walk along darkened corridors ♫ thank you very much -- " fingertips . "
♫ we 're taking calls -- from the dead . ♫ ♫ we 're taking calls -- from the dead . ♫ ♫ we 're taking phone calls from the dead . ♫ ♫ they 're calling from beyond the grave . ♫ ♫ beyond the grave . ♫ ♫ they have some questions ♫ ♫ and things to share ♫ ♫ from underneath the cold , cold ground . ♫ we 're soliciting phone calls from dead people as a special ted presentation .
we 're taking calls live on stage here at ted in monterey .
and i think we have a caller coming in here .
hello there .
you 're live .
hello . who 's there , please ?
am i on the air ?
hi there .
you 're on with they might be giants .
this is eleanor roosevelt .
hello , eleanor , please ...
i want to talk to ...
please turn off your radio , eleanor .
i wanna talk to randi .
i 've got a question for randi .
what 's your question , please ?
i want to talk to the amazing randi .
do you have a laminated badge , eleanor ?
i want my million dollars .
eleanor , i 'm sorry , do you have a laminated badge ?
no , i do n't have a badge .
well , i think we 're going to stop that part of the show .
here 's a song we like to think of as the future anthem of ted .
it 's actually a children 's song but like so many projects for children it 's really just a trojan horse for adult work .
this song is called " the alphabet ...
of nations ! " ♫ algeria , bulgaria , cambodia , dominica , ♫ ♫ egypt , france , the gambia ♫ ♫ hungary , iran , japan , kazakhstan , ♫ ♫ libya and mongolia . ♫ ♫ norway , oman , pakistan , ♫ ♫ qatar , russia , suriname , ♫ ♫ turkey , uruguay , vietnam , ♫ ♫ west xylophone , yemen , zimbabwe . ♫ ♫ algeria , bulgaria , cambodia , dominica , ♫ ♫ egypt , france , the gambia , ♫ ♫ hungary , iran , japan , kazakhstan , ♫ ♫ libya and mongolia . ♫ ♫ norway , oman , pakistan , ♫ ♫ qatar , russia , suriname , ♫ ♫ turkey , uruguay , vietnam , ♫ ♫ west xylophone , yemen , zimbabwe . ♫ ♫ azerbaijan , bolivia , canada , ♫ ♫ australia , belgium , chad , ♫ ♫ afghanistan , brunei , china , denmark , ♫ ♫ ecuador , fiji , guatemala , ♫ ♫ algeria , bulgaria , cambodia , dominica , ♫ ♫ egypt , france , the gambia , ♫ ♫ hungary , iran , japan , kazakhstan , ♫ ♫ libya and mongolia . ♫ ♫ norway , oman , pakistan , ♫ ♫ qatar , russia , suriname , ♫ ♫ turkey , uruguay , vietnam , ♫ ♫ west xylophone , yemen , zimbabwe . ♫ thank you so much .
you 've been a wonderful 8:30 audience .
have a great session .
thank you all .
