i 'd like to talk to you today about the human brain , which is what we do research on at the university of california .
just think about this problem for a second .
here is a lump of flesh , about three pounds , which you can hold in the palm of your hand .
but it can contemplate the vastness of interstellar space .
it can contemplate the meaning of infinity , ask questions about the meaning of its own existence , about the nature of god .
and this is truly the most amazing thing in the world .
it 's the greatest mystery confronting human beings : how does this all come about ?
well , the brain , as you know , is made up of neurons .
we 're looking at neurons here .
there are 100 billion neurons in the adult human brain .
and each neuron makes something like 1,000 to 10,000 contacts with other neurons in the brain .
and based on this , people have calculated that the number of permutations and combinations of brain activity exceeds the number of elementary particles in the universe .
so , how do you go about studying the brain ?
one approach is to look at patients who had lesions in different part of the brain , and study changes in their behavior .
this is what i spoke about in the last ted .
today i 'll talk about a different approach , which is to put electrodes in different parts of the brain , and actually record the activity of individual nerve cells in the brain .
sort of eavesdrop on the activity of nerve cells in the brain .
now , one recent discovery that has been made by researchers in italy , in parma , by giacomo rizzolatti and his colleagues , is a group of neurons called mirror neurons , which are on the front of the brain in the frontal lobes .
now , it turns out there are neurons which are called ordinary motor command neurons in the front of the brain , which have been known for over 50 years .
these neurons will fire when a person performs a specific action .
for example , if i do that , and reach and grab an apple , a motor command neuron in the front of my brain will fire .
if i reach out and pull an object , another neuron will fire , commanding me to pull that object .
these are called motor command neurons that have been known for a long time .
but what rizzolatti found was a subset of these neurons , maybe about 20 percent of them , will also fire when i 'm looking at somebody else performing the same action .
so , here is a neuron that fires when i reach and grab something , but it also fires when i watch joe reaching and grabbing something .
and this is truly astonishing .
because it 's as though this neuron is adopting the other person 's point of view .
it 's almost as though it 's performing a virtual reality simulation of the other person 's action .
now , what is the significance of these mirror neurons ?
for one thing they must be involved in things like imitation and emulation . because to imitate a complex act requires my brain to adopt the other person 's point of view .
so , this is important for imitation and emulation .
well , why is that important ?
well , let 's take a look at the next slide . so , how do you do imitation ? why is imitation important ?
mirror neurons and imitation , emulation .
now , let 's look at culture , the phenomenon of human culture .
if you go back in time about [ 75,000 ] to 100,000 years ago , let 's look at human evolution , it turns out that something very important happened around 75,000 years ago .
and that is , there is a sudden emergence and rapid spread of a number of skills that are unique to human beings like tool use , the use of fire , the use of shelters , and , of course , language , and the ability to read somebody else 's mind and interpret that person 's behavior .
all of that happened relatively quickly .
even though the human brain had achieved its present size almost three or four hundred thousand years ago , 100,000 years ago all of this happened very , very quickly .
and i claim that what happened was the sudden emergence of a sophisticated mirror neuron system , which allowed you to emulate and imitate other people 's actions .
so that when there was a sudden accidental discovery by one member of the group , say the use of fire , or a particular type of tool , instead of dying out , this spread rapidly , horizontally across the population , or was transmitted vertically , down the generations .
so , this made evolution suddenly lamarckian , instead of darwinian .
darwinian evolution is slow ; it takes hundreds of thousands of years .
a polar bear , to evolve a coat , will take thousands of generations , maybe 100,000 years .
a human being , a child , can just watch its parent kill another polar bear , and skin it and put the skin on its body , fur on the body , and learn it in one step . what the polar bear took 100,000 years to learn , it can learn in five minutes , maybe 10 minutes .
and then once it 's learned this it spreads in geometric proportion across a population .
this is the basis . the imitation of complex skills is what we call culture and is the basis of civilization .
now there is another kind of mirror neuron , which is involved in something quite different .
and that is , there are mirror neurons , just as there are mirror neurons for action , there are mirror neurons for touch .
in other words , if somebody touches me , my hand , neuron in the somatosensory cortex in the sensory region of the brain fires .
but the same neuron , in some cases , will fire when i simply watch another person being touched .
so , it 's empathizing the other person being touched .
so , most of them will fire when i 'm touched in different locations . different neurons for different locations .
but a subset of them will fire even when i watch somebody else being touched in the same location .
so , here again you have neurons which are enrolled in empathy .
now , the question then arises : if i simply watch another person being touched , why do i not get confused and literally feel that touch sensation merely by watching somebody being touched ?
i mean , i empathize with that person but i do n't literally feel the touch .
well , that 's because you 've got receptors in your skin , touch and pain receptors , going back into your brain and saying " do n't worry , you 're not being touched .
so , empathize , by all means , with the other person , but do not actually experience the touch , otherwise you 'll get confused and muddled . "
okay , so there is a feedback signal that vetoes the signal of the mirror neuron preventing you from consciously experiencing that touch .
but if you remove the arm , you simply anesthetize my arm , so you put an injection into my arm , anesthetize the brachial plexus , so the arm is numb , and there is no sensations coming in , if i now watch you being touched , i literally feel it in my hand .
in other words , you have dissolved the barrier between you and other human beings .
so , i call them gandhi neurons , or empathy neurons .
and this is not in some abstract metaphorical sense . all that 's separating you from him , from the other person , is your skin .
remove the skin , you experience that person 's touch in your mind .
you 've dissolved the barrier between you and other human beings .
and this , of course , is the basis of much of eastern philosophy ,
and that is there is no real independent self , aloof from other human beings , inspecting the world , inspecting other people .
you are , in fact , connected not just via facebook and internet , you 're actually quite literally connected by your neurons .
and there is whole chains of neurons around this room , talking to each other .
and there is no real distinctiveness of your consciousness from somebody else 's consciousness .
and this is not mumbo - jumbo philosophy .
it emerges from our understanding of basic neuroscience .
so , you have a patient with a phantom limb . if the arm has been removed and you have a phantom , and you watch somebody else being touched , you feel it in your phantom .
now the astonishing thing is , if you have pain in your phantom limb , you squeeze the other person 's hand , massage the other person 's hand , that relieves the pain in your phantom hand , almost as though the neuron were obtaining relief from merely watching somebody else being massaged .
so , here you have my last slide .
for the longest time people have regarded science and humanities as being distinct .
c.p. snow spoke of the two cultures : science on the one hand , humanities on the other ; never the twain shall meet .
so , i 'm saying the mirror neuron system underlies the interface allowing you to rethink about issues like consciousness , representation of self , what separates you from other human beings , what allows you to empathize with other human beings , and also even things like the emergence of culture and civilization , which is unique to human beings . thank you .
