well , that 's kind of an obvious statement up there .
i started with that sentence about 12 years ago , and i started in the context of developing countries , but you 're sitting here from every corner of the world .
so if you think of a map of your country , i think you 'll realize that for every country on earth , you could draw little circles to say , " these are places where good teachers wo n't go . "
on top of that , those are the places from where trouble comes .
so we have an ironic problem --
good teachers do n't want to go to just those places where they 're needed the most .
i started in 1999 to try and address this problem with an experiment , which was a very simple experiment in new delhi .
i basically embedded a computer into a wall of a slum in new delhi .
the children barely went to school , they did n't know any english --
they 'd never seen a computer before , and they did n't know what the internet was .
i connected high speed internet to it -- it 's about three feet off the ground -- turned it on and left it there .
after this , we noticed a couple of interesting things , which you 'll see .
but i repeated this all over india and then through a large part of the world and noticed that children will learn to do what they want to learn to do .
this is the first experiment that we did -- eight year - old boy on your right teaching his student , a six year - old girl , and he was teaching her how to browse .
this boy here in the middle of central india -- this is in a rajasthan village , where the children recorded their own music and then played it back to each other and in the process , they 've enjoyed themselves thoroughly .
they did all of this in four hours after seeing the computer for the first time .
in another south indian village , these boys here had assembled a video camera and were trying to take the photograph of a bumble bee .
they downloaded it from disney.com , or one of these websites , 14 days after putting the computer in their village .
so at the end of it , we concluded that groups of children can learn to use computers and the internet on their own , irrespective of who or where they were .
at that point , i became a little more ambitious and decided to see what else could children do with a computer .
we started off with an experiment in hyderabad , india , where i gave a group of children -- they spoke english with a very strong telugu accent .
i gave them a computer with a speech - to - text interface , which you now get free with windows , and asked them to speak into it .
so when they spoke into it , the computer typed out gibberish , so they said , " well , it does n't understand anything of what we are saying . "
so i said , " yeah , i 'll leave it here for two months .
make yourself understood to the computer . "
so the children said , " how do we do that . "
and i said , " i do n't know , actually . "
and i left .
two months later -- and this is now documented in the information technology for international development journal -- that accents had changed and were remarkably close to the neutral british accent in which i had trained the speech - to - text synthesizer .
in other words , they were all speaking like james tooley .
so they could do that on their own .
after that , i started to experiment with various other things that they might learn to do on their own .
i got an interesting phone call once from columbo , from the late arthur c. clarke , who said , " i want to see what 's going on . "
and he could n't travel , so i went over there .
he said two interesting things , " a teacher that can be replaced by a machine should be . "
the second thing he said was that , " if children have interest , then education happens . " and i was doing that in the field , so every time i would watch it and think of him .
arthur c. clarke : and they can definitely help people , because children quickly learn to navigate the web and find things which interest them .
and when you 've got interest , then you have education .
sugata mitra : i took the experiment to south africa .
this is a 15 year - old boy .
boy : ... just mention , i play games like animals , and i listen to music .
sm : and i asked him , " do you send emails ? "
and he said , " yes , and they hop across the ocean . "
this is in cambodia , rural cambodia -- a fairly silly arithmetic game , which no child would play inside the classroom or at home .
they would , you know , throw it back at you .
they 'd say , " this is very boring . "
if you leave it on the pavement and if all the adults go away , then they will show off with each other about what they can do .
this is what these children are doing .
they are trying to multiply , i think .
and all over india , at the end of about two years , children were beginning to google their homework .
as a result , the teachers reported tremendous improvements in their english -- rapid improvement and all sorts of things .
they said , " they have become really deep thinkers and so on and so forth .
and indeed they had .
i mean , if there 's stuff on google , why would you need to stuff it into your head ?
so at the end of the next four years , i decided that groups of children can navigate the internet to achieve educational objectives on their own .
at that time , a large amount of money had come into newcastle university to improve schooling in india .
so newcastle gave me a call . i said , " i 'll do it from delhi . "
they said , " there 's no way you 're going to handle a million pounds - worth of university money sitting in delhi . "
so in 2006 , i bought myself a heavy overcoat and moved to newcastle . i wanted to test the limits of the system .
the first experiment i did out of newcastle was actually done in india .
and i set myself and impossible target : can tamil speaking 12 - year - old children in a south indian village teach themselves biotechnology in english on their own ?
and i thought , i 'll test them , they 'll get a zero --
i 'll give the materials , i 'll come back and test them --
they get another zero ,
i 'll go back and say , " yes , we need teachers for certain things . "
i called in 26 children .
they all came in there , and i told them that there 's some really difficult stuff on this computer .
i would n't be surprised if you did n't understand anything .
it 's all in english , and i 'm going .
so i left them with it .
i came back after two months , and the 26 children marched in looking very , very quiet . i said , " well , did you look at any of the stuff ? "
they said , " yes , we did . "
" did you understand anything ? " " no , nothing . "
so i said , " well , how long did you practice on it before you decided you understood nothing ? "
they said , " we look at it every day . "
so i said , " for two months , you were looking at stuff you did n't understand ? "
so a 12 year - old girl raises her hand and says , literally , " apart from the fact that improper replication of the dna molecule causes genetic disease , we 've understood nothing else . "
it took me three years to publish that .
it 's just been published in the british journal of educational technology .
one of the referees who refereed the paper said , " it 's too good to be true , " which was not very nice .
well , one of the girls had taught herself to become the teacher .
and then that 's her over there .
remember , they do n't study english .
i edited out the last bit when i asked , " where is the neuron ? "
and she says , " the neuron ? the neuron , "
and then she looked and did this .
whatever the expression , it was not very nice .
so their scores had gone up from zero to 30 percent , which is an educational impossibility under the circumstances .
but 30 percent is not a pass .
so i found that they had a friend , a local accountant , a young girl , and they played football with her .
i asked that girl , " would you teach them enough biotechnology to pass ? "
and she said , " how would i do that ? i do n't know the subject . "
i said , " no , use the method of the grandmother . "
she said , " what 's that ? "
i said , " well , what you 've got to do is stand behind them and admire them all the time .
just say to them , ' that 's cool . that 's fantastic .
what is that ? can you do that again ? can you show me some more ? ' "
she did that for two months .
the scores went up to 50 , which is what the posh schools of new delhi , with a trained biotechnology teacher were getting .
so i came back to newcastle with these results and decided that there was something happening here that definitely was getting very serious .
so , having experimented in all sorts of remote places , i came to the most remote place that i could think of .
approximately 5,000 miles from delhi is the little town of gateshead .
in gateshead , i took 32 children and i started to fine - tune the method .
i made them into groups of four .
i said , " you make your own groups of four .
each group of four can use one computer and not four computers . "
remember , from the hole in the wall .
" you can exchange groups .
you can walk across to another group , if you do n't like your group , etc.
you can go to another group , peer over their shoulders , see what they 're doing , come back to you own group and claim it as your own work . "
and i explained to them that , you know , a lot of scientific research is done using that method .
the children enthusiastically got after me and said , " now , what do you want us to do ? "
i gave them six gcse questions .
the first group -- the best one -- solved everything in 20 minutes .
the worst , in 45 .
they used everything that they knew -- news groups , google , wikipedia , ask jeeves , etc.
the teachers said , " is this deep learning ? "
i said , " well , let 's try it .
i 'll come back after two months .
we 'll give them a paper test -- no computers , no talking to each other , etc. "
the average score when i 'd done it with the computers and the groups was 76 percent .
when i did the experiment , when i did the test , after two months , the score was 76 percent .
there was photographic recall inside the children ,
i suspect because they 're discussing with each other .
a single child in front of a single computer will not do that .
i have further results , which are almost unbelievable , of scores which go up with time .
because their teachers say that after the session is over , the children continue to google further .
here in britain , i put out a call for british grandmothers , after my kuppam experiment .
well , you know , they 're very vigorous people , british grandmothers .
200 of them volunteered immediately .
the deal was that they would give me one hour of broadband time , sitting in their homes , one day in a week . so they did that ,
and over the last two years , over 600 hours of instruction has happened over skype , using what my students call the granny cloud .
the granny cloud sits over there .
i can beam them to whichever school i want to .
teacher : you ca n't catch me .
you say it .
you ca n't catch me .
children : you ca n't catch me .
teacher : i 'm the gingerbread man .
children : i 'm the gingerbread man . teacher : well done . very good ...
sm : back at gateshead , a 10 - year - old girl gets into the heart of hinduism in 15 minutes .
you know , stuff which i do n't know anything about .
two children watch a tedtalk .
they wanted to be footballers before .
after watching eight tedtalks , he wants to become leonardo da vinci .
it 's pretty simple stuff .
this is what i 'm building now --
they 're called soles : self organized learning environments .
the furniture is designed so that children can sit in front of big , powerful screens , big broadband connections , but in groups .
if they want , they can call the granny cloud .
this is a sole in newcastle .
the mediator is from pune , india .
so how far can we go ? one last little bit and i 'll stop .
i went to turin in may .
i sent all the teachers away from my group of 10 year - old students . i speak only english , they speak only italian , so we had no way to communicate .
i started writing english questions on the blackboard .
the children looked at it and said , " what ? "
i said , " well , do it . "
they typed it into google , translated it into italian , went back into italian google . fifteen minutes later --
next question : where is calcutta ?
this one , they took only 10 minutes .
i tried a really hard one then .
who was pythagoras , and what did he do ?
there was silence for a while , then they said , " you 've spelled it wrong .
it 's pitagora . "
and then , in 20 minutes , the right - angled triangles began to appear on the screens .
this sent shivers up my spine .
these are 10 year - olds .
text : in another 30 minutes they would reach the theory of relativity . and then ?
sm : so you know what 's happened ?
i think we 've just stumbled across a self - organizing system .
a self - organizing system is one where a structure appears without explicit intervention from the outside .
self - organizing systems also always show emergence , which is that the system starts to do things , which it was never designed for .
which is why you react the way you do , because it looks impossible .
i think i can make a guess now -- education is self - organizing system , where learning is an emergent phenomenon .
it 'll take a few years to prove it , experimentally , but i 'm going to try .
but in the meanwhile , there is a method available .
one billion children , we need 100 million mediators -- there are many more than that on the planet -- 10 million soles , 180 billion dollars and 10 years .
we could change everything .
thanks .
