thank you . ooh , i 'm like , " phew , phew , calm down . get back into my body now . "
usually when i play out , the first thing that happens is people scream out , " what 's she doing ? ! "
i 'll play at these rock shows , be on stage standing completely still , and they 're like , " what 's she doing ? ! what 's she doing ? ! "
and then i 'll kind of be like -- -- and then they 're like , " whoa ! "
i 'm sure you 're trying to figure out , " well , how does this thing work ? "
well , what i 'm doing is controlling the pitch with my left hand .
see , the closer i get to this antenna , the higher the note gets -- -- and you can get it really low .
and with this hand i 'm controlling the volume , so the further away my right hand gets , the louder it gets .
so basically , with both of your hands you 're controlling pitch and volume and kind of trying to create the illusion that you 're doing separate notes , when really it 's continuously going ...
sometimes i startle myself : i 'll forget that i have it on , and i 'll lean over to pick up something , and then it goes like -- -- " oh ! "
and it 's like a funny sound effect that follows you around if you do n't turn the thing off .
maybe we 'll go into the next tune , because i totally lost where this is going .
we 're going to do a song by david mash called " listen : the words are gone , " and maybe i 'll have words come back into me afterwards if i can relax .
so , i 'm trying to think of some of the questions that are commonly asked ; there are so many .
and ... well , i guess i could tell you a little of the history of the theremin .
it was invented around the 1920s , and the inventor , léon theremin -- he also was a musician besides an inventor -- he came up with the idea for making the theremin , i think , when he was working on some shortwave radios .
and there 'd be that sound in the signal -- it 's like -- and he thought , " oh , what if i could control that sound and turn it into an instrument , because there are pitches in it . "
and so somehow through developing that , he eventually came to make the theremin the way it is now .
and a lot of times , even kids nowadays , they 'll make reference to a theremin by going , " whoo - hoo - hoo - hoo , " because in the '50s it was used in the sci - fi horror movies , that sound that 's like ...
it 's kind of a funny , goofy sound to do .
and sometimes if i have too much coffee , then my vibrato gets out of hand .
you 're really sensitive to your body and its functions when you 're behind this thing .
you have to stay so still if you want to have the most control .
it reminds me of the balancing act earlier on -- what michael was doing -- because you 're fighting so hard to keep the balance with what you 're playing with and stay in tune , and at the same time you do n't want to focus so much on being in tune all the time ; you want to be feeling the music .
and then also , you 're trying to stay very , very , very still because little movements with other parts of your body will affect the pitch , or sometimes if you 're holding a low note -- -- and breathing will make it ...
if i pass out on the next song ...
i think of it almost like like a yoga instrument because it makes you so aware of every little crazy thing your body is doing , or just aware of what you do n't want it to be doing while you 're playing ; you do n't want to have any sudden movements .
and if i go to a club and play a gig , people are like , " here , have some drinks on us ! "
and it 's like , " well , i 'm about to go on soon ; i do n't want to be like -- -- you know ? "
it really does reflect the mood that you 're in also , if you 're ...
it 's similar to being a vocalist , except instead of it coming out of your throat , you 're controlling it just in the air and you do n't really have a point of reference ; you 're always relying on your ears and adjusting constantly .
you just have to always adjust to what 's happening and realize you 'll have bummer notes come here and there and listen to it , adjust it , and just move on , or else you 'll get too tied up and go crazy . like me .
i think we will play another tune now .
i 'm going to do " lush life . " it 's one of my favorite tunes to play .
