those of you who have seen the film " moneyball , " or have read the book by michael lewis , will be familiar with the story of billy beane .
billy was supposed to be a tremendous ballplayer ; all the scouts told him so .
they told his parents that they predicted that he was going to be a star .
but what actually happened when he signed the contract -- and by the way , he did n't want to sign that contract , he wanted to go to college -- which is what my mother , who actually does love me , said that i should do too , and i did -- well , he did n't do very well . he struggled mightily .
he got traded a couple of times , he ended up in the minors for most of his career , and he actually ended up in management . he ended up as a general manager of the oakland a 's .
now for many of you in this room , ending up in management , which is also what i 've done , is seen as a success .
i can assure you that for a kid trying to make it in the bigs , going into management ai n't no success story . it 's a failure .
and what i want to talk to you about today , and share with you , is that our healthcare system , our medical system , is just as bad at predicting what happens to people in it -- patients , others -- as those scouts were at predicting what would happen to billy beane .
and yet , every day thousands of people in this country are diagnosed with preconditions .
we hear about pre - hypertension , we hear about pre - dementia , we hear about pre - anxiety , and i 'm pretty sure that i diagnosed myself with that in the green room .
we also refer to subclinical conditions .
there 's subclinical atherosclerosis , subclinical hardening of the arteries , obviously linked to heart attacks , potentially .
one of my favorites is called subclinical acne .
if you look up subclinical acne , you may find a website , which i did , which says that this is the easiest type of acne to treat .
you do n't have the pustules or the redness and inflammation .
maybe that 's because you do n't actually have acne .
i have a name for all of these conditions , it 's another precondition : i call them preposterous .
in baseball , the game follows the pre - game .
season follows the pre - season .
but with a lot of these conditions , that actually is n't the case , or at least it is n't the case all the time . it 's as if there 's a rain delay , every single time in many cases .
we have pre - cancerous lesions , which often do n't turn into cancer .
and yet , if you take , for example , subclinical osteoporosis , a bone thinning disease , the precondition , otherwise known as osteopenia , you would have to treat 270 women for three years in order to prevent one broken bone .
that 's an awful lot of women when you multiply by the number of women who were diagnosed with this osteopenia .
and so is it any wonder , given all of the costs and the side effects of the drugs that we 're using to treat these preconditions , that every year we 're spending more than two trillion dollars on healthcare and yet 100,000 people a year -- and that 's a conservative estimate -- are dying not because of the conditions they have , but because of the treatments that we 're giving them and the complications of those treatments ?
we 've medicalized everything in this country .
women in the audience , i have some pretty bad news that you already know , and that 's that every aspect of your life has been medicalized .
strike one is when you hit puberty .
you now have something that happens to you once a month that has been medicalized .
it 's a condition ; it has to be treated . strike two is if you get pregnant .
that 's been medicalized as well .
you have to have a high - tech experience of pregnancy , otherwise something might go wrong .
strike three is menopause .
we all know what happened when millions of women were given hormone replacement therapy for menopausal symptoms for decades until all of a sudden we realized , because a study came out , a big one , nih - funded .
it said , actually , a lot of that hormone replacement therapy may be doing more harm than good for many of those women .
just in case , i do n't want to leave the men out -- i am one , after all -- i have really bad news for all of you in this room , and for everyone listening and watching elsewhere : you all have a universally fatal condition .
so , just take a moment .
it 's called pre - death .
every single one of you has it , because you have the risk factor for it , which is being alive .
but i have some good news for you , because i 'm a journalist , i like to end things in a happy way or a forward - thinking way .
and that good news is that if you can survive to the end of my talk , which we 'll see if that happens for everyone , you will be a pre - vivor .
i made up pre - death .
if i used someone else 's pre - death , i apologize , i think i made it up .
i did n't make up pre - vivor .
pre - vivor is what a particular cancer advocacy group would like everyone who just has a risk factor , but has n't actually had that cancer , to call themselves .
you are a pre - vivor .
we 've had hbo here this morning . i 'm wondering if mark burnett is anywhere in the audience , i 'd like to suggest a reality tv show called " pre - vivor . "
if you develop a disease , you 're off the island .
but the problem is , we have a system that is completely -- basically promoted this .
we 've selected , at every point in this system , to do what we do , and to give everyone a precondition and then eventually a condition , in some cases .
start with the doctor - patient relationship . doctors , most of them , are in a fee - for - service system . they are basically incentivized to do more -- procedures , tests , prescribe medications .
patients come to them , they want to do something . we 're americans , we ca n't just stand there , we have to do something . and so they want a drug .
they want a treatment . they want to be told , this is what you have and this is how you treat it . if the doctor does n't give you that , you go somewhere else .
that 's not very good for doctors ' business .
or even worse , if you are diagnosed with something eventually , and the doctor did n't order that test , you get sued .
we have pharmaceutical companies that are constantly trying to expand the indications , expand the number of people who are eligible for a given treatment , because that obviously helps their bottom line . we have advocacy groups , like the one that 's come up with pre - vivor , who want to make more and more people feel they are at risk , or might have a condition , so that they can raise more funds and raise visibility , et cetera .
but this is n't actually , despite what journalists typically do , this is n't actually about blaming particular players .
we are all responsible .
i 'm responsible .
i actually root for the yankees , i mean talk about rooting for the worst possible offender when it comes to doing everything you can do .
thank you .
but everyone is responsible .
i went to medical school , and i did n't have a course called how to think skeptically , or how not to order tests .
we have this system where that 's what you do .
and it actually took being a journalist to understand all these incentives . you know , economists like to say , there are no bad people , there are just bad incentives .
and that 's actually true .
because what we 've created is a sort of field of dreams , when it comes to medical technology .
so when you put another mri in every corner , you put a robot in every hospital saying that everyone has to have robotic surgery .
well , we 've created a system where if you build it , they will come .
but you can actually perversely tell people to come , convince them that they have to come .
it was when i became a journalist that i really realized how i was part of this problem , and how we all are part of this problem .
i was medicalizing every risk factor , i was writing stories , commissioning stories , every day , that were trying to , not necessarily make people worried , although that was what often happened .
but , you know , there are ways out .
i saw my own internist last week , and he said to me , " you know , " and he told me something that everyone in this audience could have told me for free , but i paid him for the privilege , which is that i need to lose some weight .
well , he 's right . i 've had honest - to - goodness high blood pressure for a dozen years now , same age my father got it , and it 's a real disease . it 's not pre - hypertension , it 's actual hypertension , high blood pressure .
well , he 's right , but he did n't say to me , well , you have pre - obesity or you have pre - diabetes , or anything like that . he did n't say , better start taking this statin , you need to lower your cholesterol .
no , he said , " go out and lose some weight . come back and see me in a bit , or just give me a call and let me know how you 're doing . "
so that 's , to me , a way forward .
billy beane , by the way , learned the same thing .
he learned , from watching this kid who he eventually hired , who was really successful for him , that it was n't swinging for the fences , it was n't swinging at every pitch like the sluggers do , which is what all the expensive teams like the yankees like to -- they like to pick up those guys .
this kid told him , you know , you gotta watch the guys , and you gotta go out and find the guys who like to walk , because getting on base by a walk is just as good , and in our healthcare system we need to figure out , is that really a good pitch or should we let it go by and not swing at everything ?
thanks .
