my name is joseph , a member of parliament in kenya .
picture a maasai village , and one evening , government soldiers come , surround the village and ask each elder to bring one boy to school .
that 's how i went to school -- pretty much a government guy pointing a gun and told my father , " you have to make a choice . "
so , i walked very comfortably to this missionary school that was run by an american missionary , and the first thing the american missionary gave me was a candy .
i had never in my life ever tasted candy .
so i said to myself , with all these hundred other boys , this is where i belong .
stayed when everybody else was dropping out .
my family moved ; we 're nomads .
every time school closed -- it was a boarding school and i was seven -- you had to travel until you find them .
fifty miles , 40 miles , it does n't matter .
you slept in the bush , but you kept going .
and i stayed . i do n't know why i stayed , but i stayed .
and all of a sudden i passed the national examination , found myself in a very beautiful high school in kenya .
and i finished high school . and just walking , i found a man who gave me a full scholarship to the united states .
my mother still lives in a cow - dung hut , none of my brothers are going to school , and this man told me , " here , go . "
so i got a scholarship to st. lawrence university , upstate new york ; finished that . and then after that i went to harvard graduate school ; finished that . and then i worked in dc a little bit : i wrote a book for national geographic and taught history , u.s. history .
and every time , i kept going back home listening to the problems of these people -- sick people , people with no water , all this stuff -- and every time i go back to america , i kept thinking about them .
then one day , an elder gave me a story and this story went like this : long time ago , there was a big war between tribes .
and there was this specific tribe that was really afraid of this other luhya tribe .
and every time , they sent scouts out there to make sure no one attacked them .
so one day , the scouts came running and told the villagers , " the enemies are coming . only half an hour away , they 'll be here . "
so people scrambled , took their things and ready to go , move out .
but there were two men : one man was blind , one man had no legs -- he was born like that .
the leader of the chiefs said , " no , sorry . we ca n't take you . you 'll slow us down .
we have to flee our women and children , we have to run . "
and they were left behind , waiting to die .
but these two people worked something out .
the blind man said , " look , i 'm a very strong man but i ca n't see . "
the man with no legs says , " i can see as far as the end of the world , but i ca n't save myself from a cat , or whatever animals . "
so the blind man went down on his knees , down like this , and told the man with no legs to go over his back , and stood up .
the man on top can see , the blind man can walk .
and these guys took off , followed the footsteps of the villagers until they found and passed them .
so , this was told to me in a setup of elders .
and it 's a really poor area . i represent northern kenya : the most nomadic , remote areas you can even find .
and that man told me , " so , here you are .
you 've got a good education from america , you have a good life in america ; what are you going to do for us ?
we want you to be our eyes , we 'll give you the legs .
we 'll walk you , you lead us . "
so the opportunity came , and i was always thinking about that : " what can i do to help my people ?
every time you go to an area where for 43 years of independence , we still do n't have basic health facilities .
a man has to be transported in a wheelbarrow 20 , 30 kilometers for a hospital . no clean drinking water .
so i said , " i 'm going to dedicate myself .
i 'm leaving america . i 'm going to run for office . "
so last july ... i moved from america in june , ran in july election and won .
and i came for them , and that 's my goal .
and right now i have in place , for the last nine months , a plan that in five years , every nomad will have clean drinking water .
we 're building dispensaries across that constituency .
i 'm asking my friends from america to help with bringing nurses or doctors to help us out .
i 'm trying to improve infrastructure .
i 'm using the knowledge i received from the united states and from my community to move them forward .
i 'm trying to develop homegrown solutions to our issues because we realize that people from outside can come and help us , but if we do n't help ourselves , there 's nothing we can do .
so my plan right now as i continue with introducing students to different fields -- some become doctors , some lawyers -- we want to produce a comprehensive group of people , students , who can come back and help us see a community grow that is in the middle of a huge economic recession .
so as i continue to be a member of parliament and as i continue listening to all of you talking about botany , talking about health , talking about democracy , talking about new inventions , i 'm hoping that one day in my own little community -- which is 26,000 square kilometers , maybe five times the size of rhode island -- with no roads , we 'll be able to become a model to help others develop .
thank you very much .
