i have a big impact on the planet to travel here by plane .
i emitted , in the atmosphere , nine tons of co 2 ; that is the weight of two elephants .
i came here to speak about ecology , and i emitted as much co 2 as a frenchman in one year .
so what do i have to do ?
i have to kill a frenchman when i come back at home ?
i have to do my carbon offset in another way , like i do every time .
in fact my work is to show our impact on our planet .
i 'm going to show you some examples of the last pictures i 've done in the last year .
alberta sand oil , a lot of pollution .
you know the problem ; we do n't want to believe what we know .
in alberta people work nonstop , 24 hours by seven to extract as much oil as they can .
we know about the end of oil .
oil sand is not a long - term solution .
but we use three times more oil than we find every year .
we do n't want to believe what we know .
deny .
coral reef in new caledonia .
100 percent of the coral may be wiped out before 2050 because of global warming .
and you know how coral are very sensitive to temperature , and are very important for the biodiversity of the sea .
north pole . i 've done this picture last summer .
it was impossible to do this picture 15 years ago .
now there is a new way open between atlantic and pacific .
the thickness of the arctic decreased more than 40 percent there is a new face of kilimanjaro without ice .
sad picture .
it lost 80 percent of its ice .
according to scientists , in 100 years all the mountain glacier will be gone .
glaciers are very important for the life on earth .
like al gore told you , two billion people live on the water from the glacier of himalaya .
return of fish men .
one fifth of human kind depend on fish to live .
today now 70 percent of the fish stock are over - exploited .
according to fao , if we do n't change our system of fishing the main sea resources will be gone in 2050 .
we do n't want to believe what we know .
the beautiful picture , by [ unclear ] in africa .
one human of six have not enough to eat in the world .
one billion people have not enough to eat .
in africa , corn is one of the main foods in many places .
here in america , 90 percent of the corn cultivated is used to feed animals or to do oil .
palm tree plantation in borneo .
every year we lose 50 thousand square miles in deforestation .
refugee camp in darfur .
today we have 20 million refugees in the world .
according to the u.n. , we speak about 250 million refugees in 2050 .
i always show my pictures in the street .
we have done already 100 exhibitions in the cities .
but how to understand the world without the voice of people ?
landscape was not enough .
it was obvious to me to do another work .
i launched a project named six billion others .
i sent around the world six cameramen asking the same question , the same crucial question , about life .
we have done five thousand interviews .
i 'm going to show you this .
man : the most beautiful thing that has happened to me in life ?
it 's when my dad told me , " here , i give you this girl as your fiance . "
woman : love ? love is nice if you can have it .
second man : romeo and juliet , sassi and panno , dodi and diana , heer and ranjha , this is love ! third man : my greatest fear is ...
woman : you 're asking me a hard question .
fourth man : i live happily because what else should i do ?
fifth man : the first thing i remember ...
fifth man : ... from my childhood , fifth man : we were having fun , biking .
seventh man : we invented stories , we flew around the world , while remaining in our attic .
eighth man : i had a big laugh today .
ninth man : you see , family is ... it 's awful .
10th man : in the word life , you have the life .
11th man : who am i ? is n't that the biggest question ?
12th man : if i was to go back to iraq and speak to the people , i 'd have to bow down and kiss their feet .
just as that woman tried to kiss my feet when we were taking her sons .
i feel ashamed .
and i feel humbled by their strength .
and i will forever feel a need to make reparations to iraq .
second woman : dad , mom , i grew up .
you should n't worry about me . dad does n't need to go to work .
my family ... what can i say ?
at the moment , my family is very poor , my life here in shenzhen is just about showing myself that i can earn more and to let my parents stay and have something to live on .
i do n't want them to spend their whole lives in poverty .
if someday i can achieve something , i would like to say thank you daddy and mommy .
thank you .
thank you for having fed me and raised me , and for making my life of today . thank you .
13th man : after seven years now of being in a wheelchair , i 've done more in life being in a chair than out of a chair .
i still surf . i sail the world . i freedive .
after many people said i could n't do that .
and i think that comes from connecting with nature , connecting with the energy of life , because we 're all disabled in some way on the planet -- spiritually , mentally or physically .
i got the easy part .
14th man : let 's say that you and me like each other .
you come from elsewhere .
you do n't know me . i do n't know you .
we talk without lying .
if i do like you , i give you one cow and many other things and we become friends .
how can we make it all by ourselves ?
yab : you can also go to the website , answer -- respond to the questions also .
forty crucial questions .
now i am going to speak to you about my movie .
for the last three years , i was shooting the earth for the movie .
the name of the movie is " home " -- " maison . "
it is about the state of the planet .
it 's a fantastic story of life on the earth .
i 'm very proud to show you the teaser .
video : this earth is four and a half billion years old .
these plants , several hundred million years old .
and we humans have been walking upright for only 200 thousand years .
we 've managed to adapt , and have conquered the whole planet .
for generations , we 've been raising our children , not unlike millions of other species living beside us .
for the past 30 years i 've been closely watching the earth and its dwellers from high up in the sky .
our life is tied to the well - being of our planet .
we depend on water , forests , deserts , oceans .
fishing , breeding , farming are still the world 's foremost human occupations .
and what binds us together is far greater than what divides us .
we all share the same need for the earth 's gifts -- the same wish to rise above ourselves , and become better .
and yet we carry on raising walls to keep us apart .
today our greatest battle is to protect the natural offerings of our planet .
in less than 50 years we 've altered it more thoroughly than in the entire history of mankind .
half of the world 's forests have vanished .
water resources are running low .
intensive farming is depleting soils .
our energy sources are not sustainable .
the climate is changing .
we are endangering ourselves .
we 're only trying to improve our lives .
but the wealth gaps are growing wider .
we have n't yet understood that we 're going at a much faster pace than the planet can sustain .
we know that solutions are available today .
we all have the power to change this trend for the better .
so what are we waiting for ?
yab : luc besson is the producer of the movie .
but it is not a normal movie .
the film is going to be distributed free .
this film has no copyright .
on the five of june , the environment day , everybody can download the movie on internet .
the film is given for free to the distributor for tv and theater to show it the fifth of june .
there is no business on this movie .
it is also available for school , cities , ngos and you .
we have to believe what we know .
let me tell you something .
it 's too late to be pessimistic -- really too late .
we have all a part of the solutions .
to finish , i would like to welcome the 4,700th baby born since the beginning of this talk .
merci beaucoup . i love you .
