so i thought , " i will talk about death . "
seemed to be the passion today .
actually , it 's not about death .
it 's inevitable , terrible , but really what i want to talk about is , i 'm just fascinated by the legacy people leave when they die .
that 's what i want to talk about .
so art buchwald left his legacy of humor with a video that appeared soon after he died , saying , " hi ! i 'm art buchwald , and i just died . "
and mike , who i met at galapagos , a trip which i won at ted , is leaving notes on cyberspace where he is chronicling his journey through cancer .
and my father left me a legacy of his handwriting through letters and a notebook .
in the last two years of his life , when he was sick , he filled a notebook with his thoughts about me .
he wrote about my strengths , weaknesses , and gentle suggestions for improvement , quoting specific incidents , and held a mirror to my life .
after he died , i realized that no one writes to me anymore .
handwriting is a disappearing art .
i 'm all for email and thinking while typing , but why give up old habits for new ?
why ca n't we have letter writing and email exchange in our lives ?
there are times when i want to trade all those years that i was too busy to sit with my dad and chat with him , and trade all those years for one hug .
but too late .
but that 's when i take out his letters and i read them , and the paper that touched his hand is in mine , and i feel connected to him .
so maybe we all need to leave our children with a value legacy , and not a financial one .
a value for things with a personal touch -- an autograph book , a soul - searching letter .
if a fraction of this powerful ted audience could be inspired to buy a beautiful paper -- john , it 'll be a recycled one -- and write a beautiful letter to someone they love , we actually may start a revolution where our children may go to penmanship classes .
so what do i plan to leave for my son ?
i collect autograph books , and those of you authors in the audience know i hound you for them -- and cds too , tracy .
i plan to publish my own notebook .
as i witnessed my father 's body being swallowed by fire , i sat by his funeral pyre and wrote .
i have no idea how i 'm going to do it , but i am committed to compiling his thoughts and mine into a book , and leave that published book for my son .
i 'd like to end with a few verses of what i wrote at my father 's cremation .
and those linguists , please pardon the grammar , because i 've not looked at it in the last 10 years .
i took it out for the first time to come here .
" picture in a frame , ashes in a bottle , boundless energy confined in the bottle , forcing me to deal with reality , forcing me to deal with being grown up .
i hear you and i know that you would want me to be strong , but right now , i am being sucked down , surrounded and suffocated by these raging emotional waters , craving to cleanse my soul , trying to emerge on a firm footing one more time , to keep on fighting and flourishing just as you taught me .
your encouraging whispers in my whirlpool of despair , holding me and heaving me to shores of sanity , to live again and to love again . "
thank you .
