stephanie white : i 'm going to let her introduce herself to everybody .
can you tell everybody your name ?
einstein : einstein .
sw : this is einstein . can you tell everyone " hi " ?
e : hello .
sw : that 's nice . can you be polite ?
e : hi , sweetheart .
sw : much better . well , einstein is very honored to be here at ted 2006 , amongst all you modern - day einsteins . in fact , she 's very excited .
e : woo .
sw : yeah .
since we 've arrived , there 's been a constant buzz about all the exciting speakers here for the conference .
this morning we 've heard a lot of whispers about tom reilly 's wrap - up on saturday . einstein , did you hear whispers ?
e : [ squawks ] sw : yeah .
einstein 's especially interested in penelope 's talk .
a lot of her research goes on in caves , which can get pretty dusty .
e : achoo !
sw : it could make her sneeze . but more importantly , her research could help einstein find a cure for her never - ending scratchy throat .
einstein : [ coughs ] sw : yeah .
well , bob russell was telling us about his work on nanotubes in his research at the microscopic level .
well , that 's really cool , but what einstein 's really hoping is that maybe he 'll genetically engineer a five - pound peanut .
e : oh , my god ! my god ! my god !
sw : yeah . she would get really , really excited .
that is one big peanut . since einstein is a bird , she 's very interested in things that fly .
she thinks burt rutan is very impressive .
e : ooh .
sw : yeah . she especially likes his latest achievement , spaceshipone .
einstein , would you like to ride in burt 's spaceship ?
e : [ spaceship noise ] sw : even if it does n't have a laser ?
e : [ laser noise ] sw : yeah , yeah . that was pretty funny , einstein .
now , einstein also thinks , you know , working in caves and travelling through space -- it 's all very dangerous jobs .
it would be very dangerous if you fell down .
e : wheeeeeee ! [ splat ] sw : yeah .
little splat at the end there . einstein , did that hurt ?
e : ow , ow , ow .
sw : yeah . it 's all a lot of hard work .
e : [ squawks ] sw : yeah . it can get a bird like einstein frustrated .
e : [ squawks ] sw : yeah , it sure can . but when einstein needs to relax from her job educating the public , she loves to take in the arts .
if the children of the uganda need another dance partner , einstein could sure fit the bill , because she loves to dance .
can you get down ?
e : [ bobbing head ] sw : let 's get down for everybody . come on now .
she 's going to make me do it , too . ooh , ooh .
einstein : ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh .
sw : do your head now .
e : ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh .
sw : or maybe sirena huang would like to learn some arias on her violin , and einstein can sing along with some opera ?
e : [ operatic squawk ] sw : very good .
or maybe stu just needs another backup singer ?
einstein , can you also sing ?
i know , you need to get rid of that seed first . can you sing ?
e : la , la .
sw : there you go . and , of course , if all else fails , you can just run off and enjoy a fun fiesta .
e : [ squawks ] sw : all right . well , einstein was pretty embarrassed to admit this earlier , but she was telling me backstage that she had a problem .
e : what 's the matter ?
sw : no , i do n't have a problem . you have the problem , remember ?
you were saying that you were really embarrassed , because you 're in love with a pirate ?
e : yar .
sw : there you go . and what do pirates like to drink ?
e : beer .
sw : yeah , that 's right . but you do n't like to drink beer , einstein .
you like to drink water .
e : [ water sound ] sw : very good . now , really , she is pretty nervous .
because one of her favorite folks from back home is here , and she 's pretty nervous to meet him .
she thinks al gore is a really good - looking man .
what do you say to a good - looking man ?
e : hey , baby .
sw : and so do all the folks back home in tennessee .
e : yee haw .
sw : and since she 's such a big fan , she knows that his birthday is coming up at the end of march .
and we did n't think he 'd be in town then , so einstein wanted to do something special for him .
so let 's see if einstein will sing " happy birthday " to al gore .
can you sing " happy birthday " to him ?
e : happy birthday to you .
sw : again .
e : happy birthday to you .
sw : again .
e : happy birthday to you .
sw : big finish .
e : happy birthday to you .
sw : good job !
well , before we wrap it up , she would like to give a shout out to all our animal friends back at the knoxville zoo .
einstein , do you want to say " hi " to all the owls ?
e : woo , woo , woo .
sw : what about the other birds ?
e : tweet , tweet , tweet .
sw : and the penguin ?
e : quack , quack , quack .
sw : there we go .
let 's get that one out of there . how about a chimpanzee ?
e : ooh , ooh , ooh . aah , aah , aah .
sw : very good .
what about a wolf ?
e : ooooowww .
sw : and a pig ?
e : oink , oink , oink .
sw : and the rooster ?
e : cock - a - doodle - doo !
sw : and how about those cats ?
e : meow .
sw : at the zoo we have big cats from the jungle .
e : grrrrr .
sw : what about a skunk ?
e : stinker .
sw : she 's a comedian . i suppose you think you 're famous ? are you famous ?
e : superstar .
sw : yeah . you are a superstar .
well , we would like to encourage all of you to do your part to help protect einstein 's animal friends , and to do your part to help protect their homes that they live [ in ] .
now , einstein does say it best when we ask her .
why do we want to protect your home ?
e : i 'm special .
sw : you are very special . what would you like to say to all these nice people ?
e : i love you .
sw : that 's good . can you blow them a kiss ?
e : [ kissing noise ] sw : and what do you say when it 's time to go ?
e : goodbye .
sw : good job . thank you all .
