the fragrance that you will smell , you will never be able to smell this way again .
it 's a fragrance called beyond paradise , which you can find in any store in the nation .
except here it 's been split up in parts by estée lauder and by the perfumer who did it , calice becker , and i 'm most grateful to them for this .
and it 's been split up in successive bits and a chord .
so what you 're smelling now is the top note .
and then will come what they call the heart , the lush heart note .
i will show it to you .
the eden top note is named after the eden project in the u.k.
the lush heart note , melaleuca bark note -- which does not contain any melaleuca bark , because it 's totally forbidden .
and after that , the complete fragrance .
now what you are smelling is a combination of -- i asked how many molecules there were in there , and nobody would tell me .
so i put it through a g.c. , a gas chromatograph that i have in my office , and it 's about 400 .
so what you 're smelling is several hundred molecules floating through the air , hitting your nose .
and do not get the impression that this is very subjective .
you are all smelling pretty much the same thing , ok ?
smell has this reputation of being somewhat different for each person .
it 's not really true .
and perfumery shows you that ca n't be true , because if it were like that it would n't be an art , ok ?
now , while the smell wafts over you , let me tell you the history of an idea .
everything that you 're smelling in here is made up of atoms that come from what i call the upper east side of the periodic table -- a nice , safe neighborhood .
you really do n't want to leave it if you want to have a career in perfumery .
some people have tried in the 1920s to add things from the bad parts , and it did n't really work .
these are the five atoms from which just about everything that you 're going to smell in real life , from coffee to fragrance , are made of .
the top note that you smelled at the very beginning , the cut - grass green , what we call in perfumery -- they 're weird terms -- and this would be called a green note , because it smells of something green , like cut grass .
this is cis - 3 - hexene - 1 - ol . and i had to learn chemistry on the fly in the last three years . a very expensive high school chemistry education .
this has six carbon atoms , so " hexa , " hexene - 1 - ol .
it has one double bond , it has an alcohol on the end , so it 's " ol , " and that 's why they call it cis - 3 - hexene - 1 - ol .
once you figure this out , you can really impress people at parties .
this smells of cut grass . now , this is the skeleton of the molecule .
if you dress it up with atoms , hydrogen atoms -- that 's what it looks like when you have it on your computer -- but actually it 's sort of more like this , in the sense that the atoms have a certain sphere that you cannot penetrate . they repel .
ok , now . why does this thing smell of cut grass , ok ?
why does n't it smell of potatoes or violets ? well , there are really two theories .
but the first theory is : it must be the shape .
and that 's a perfectly reasonable theory in the sense that almost everything else in biology works by shape .
enzymes that chew things up , antibodies , it 's all , you know , the fit between a protein and whatever it is grabbing , in this case a smell .
and i will try and explain to you what 's wrong with this notion .
and the other theory is that we smell molecular vibrations .
now , this is a totally insane idea .
and when i first came across it in the early '90s , i thought my predecessor , malcolm dyson and bob wright , had really taken leave of their senses , and i 'll explain to you why this was the case .
however , i came to realize gradually that they may be right -- and i have to convince all my colleagues that this is so , but i 'm working on it .
here 's how shape works in normal receptors .
you have a molecule coming in , it gets into the protein , which is schematic here , and it causes this thing to switch , to turn , to move in some way by binding in certain parts .
and the attraction , the forces , between the molecule and the protein cause the motion . this is a shape - based idea .
now , what 's wrong with shape is summarized in this slide .
the way -- i expect everybody to memorize these compounds .
this is one page of work from a chemist 's workbook , ok ?
working for a fragrance company .
he 's making 45 molecules , and he 's looking for a sandalwood , something that smells of sandalwood .
because there 's a lot of money in sandalwoods .
and of these 45 molecules , only 4629 actually smells of sandalwood .
and he puts an exclamation mark , ok ? this is an awful lot of work .
this actually is roughly , in man - years of work , 200,000 dollars roughly , if you keep them on the low salaries with no benefits .
so this is a profoundly inefficient process .
and my definition of a theory is , it 's not just something that you teach people ; it 's labor saving .
a theory is something that enables you to do less work .
i love the idea of doing less work . so let me explain to you why -- a very simple fact that tells you why this shape theory really does not work very well .
this is cis - 3 - hexene - 1 - ol . it smells of cut grass .
this is cis - 3 - hexene - 1 - thiol , and this smells of rotten eggs , ok ?
now , you will have noticed that vodka never smells of rotten eggs .
if it does , you put the glass down , you go to a different bar .
this is -- in other words , we never get the o - h -- we never mistake it for an s - h , ok ?
like , at no concentration , even pure , you know , if you smelt pure ethanol , it does n't smell of rotten eggs .
conversely , there is no concentration at which the sulfur compound will smell like vodka .
it 's very hard to explain this by molecular recognition .
now , i showed this to a physicist friend of mine who has a profound distaste for biology , and he says , " that 's easy ! the things are a different color ! "
we have to go a little beyond that . now let me explain why vibrational theory has some sort of interest in it . these molecules , as you saw in the beginning , the building blocks had springs connecting them to each other .
in fact , molecules are able to vibrate at a set of frequencies which are very specific for each molecule and for the bonds connecting them .
so this is the sound of the o - h stretch , translated into the audible range .
s - h , quite a different frequency .
now , this is kind of interesting , because it tells you that you should be looking for a particular fact , which is this : nothing in the world smells like rotten eggs except s - h , ok ?
now , fact b : nothing in the world has that frequency except s - h.
if you look on this , imagine a piano keyboard .
the s - h stretch is in the middle of a part of the keyboard that has been , so to speak , damaged , and there are no neighboring notes , nothing is close to it .
you have a unique smell , a unique vibration .
so i went searching when i started in this game to convince myself that there was any degree of plausibility to this whole crazy story .
i went searching for a type of molecule , any molecule , that would have that vibration and that -- the obvious prediction was that it should absolutely smell of sulfur .
if it did n't , the whole idea was toast , and i might as well move on to other things .
now , after searching high and low for several months , i discovered that there was a type of molecule called a borane which has exactly the same vibration .
now the good news is , boranes you can get hold of .
the bad news is they 're rocket fuels .
most of them explode spontaneously in contact with air , and when you call up the companies , they only give you minimum ten tons , ok ?
so this was not what they call a laboratory - scale experiment , and they would n't have liked it at my college .
however , i managed to get a hold of a borane eventually , and here is the beast .
and it really does have the same -- if you calculate , if you measure the vibrational frequencies , they are the same as s - h.
now , does it smell of sulfur ? well , if you go back in the literature , there 's a man who knew more about boranes than anyone alive then or since , alfred stock , he synthesized all of them .
and in an enormous 40 - page paper in german he says , at one point -- my wife is german and she translated it for me -- and at one point he says , " ganz widerlich geruch , " an " absolutely repulsive smell , " which is good . reminiscent of hydrogen sulfide .
so this fact that boranes smell of sulfur had been known since 1910 , and utterly forgotten until 1997 , 1998 .
now , the slight fly in the ointment is this : that if we smell molecular vibrations , we must have a spectroscope in our nose .
now , this is a spectroscope , ok , on my laboratory bench .
and it 's fair to say that if you look up somebody 's nose , you 're unlikely to see anything resembling this .
and this is the main objection to the theory .
ok , great , we smell vibrations . how ? all right ?
now when people ask this kind of question , they neglect something , which is that physicists are really clever , unlike biologists .
this is a joke . i 'm a biologist , ok ?
so it 's a joke against myself .
bob jacklovich and john lamb at ford motor company , in the days when ford motor was spending vast amounts of money on fundamental research , discovered a way to build a spectroscope that was intrinsically nano - scale .
in other words , no mirrors , no lasers , no prisms , no nonsense , just a tiny device , and he built this device . and this device uses electron tunneling .
now , i could do the dance of electron tunneling , but i 've done a video instead , which is much more interesting . here 's how it works .
electrons are fuzzy creatures , and they can jump across gaps , but only at equal energy . if the energy differs , they ca n't jump .
unlike us , they wo n't fall off the cliff .
ok . now . if something absorbs the energy , the electron can travel .
so here you have a system , you have something -- and there 's plenty of that stuff in biology -- some substance giving an electron , and the electron tries to jump , and only when a molecule comes along that has the right vibration does the reaction happen , ok ?
this is the basis for the device that these two guys at ford built .
and every single part of this mechanism is actually plausible in biology .
in other words , i 've taken off - the - shelf components , and i 've made a spectroscope .
what 's nice about this idea , if you have a philosophical bent of mind , is that then it tells you that the nose , the ear and the eye are all vibrational senses .
of course , it does n't matter , because it could also be that they 're not .
but it has a certain -- -- it has a certain ring to it which is attractive to people who read too much 19th - century german literature .
and then a magnificent thing happened : i left academia and joined the real world of business , and a company was created around my ideas to make new molecules using my method , along the lines of , let 's put someone else 's money where your mouth is .
and one of the first things that happened was we started going around to fragrance companies asking for what they needed , because , of course , if you could calculate smell , you do n't need chemists .
you need a computer , a mac will do it , if you know how to program the thing right , ok ? so you can try a thousand molecules , you can try ten thousand molecules in a weekend , and then you only tell the chemists to make the right one .
and so that 's a direct path to making new odorants .
and one of the first things that happened was we went to see some perfumers in france -- and here 's where i do my charles fleischer impression -- and one of them says , " you cannot make a coumarin . "
he says to me , " i bet you cannot make a coumarin . "
now , coumarin is a very common thing , a material , in fragrance which is derived from a bean that comes from south america .
and it is the classic synthetic aroma chemical , ok ?
it 's the molecule that has made men 's fragrances smell the way they do since 1881 , to be exact .
and the problem is it 's a carcinogen .
so nobody likes particularly to -- you know , aftershave with carcinogens .
there are some reckless people , but it 's not worth it , ok ?
so they asked us to make a new coumarin . and so we started doing calculations .
and the first thing you do is you calculate the vibrational spectrum of coumarin , and you smooth it out , so that you have a nice picture of what the sort of chord , so to speak , of coumarin is .
and then you start cranking the computer to find other molecules , related or unrelated , that have the same vibrations .
and we actually , in this case , i 'm sorry to say , it happened -- it was serendipitous .
because i got a phone call from our chief chemist and he said , look , i 've just found this such a beautiful reaction , that even if this compound does n't smell of coumarin , i want to do it , it 's just such a nifty , one step -- i mean , chemists have weird minds -- one step , 90 percent yield , you know , and you get this lovely crystalline compound . let us try it .
and i said , first of all , let me do the calculation on that compound , bottom right , which is related to coumarin , but has an extra pentagon inserted into the molecule .
calculate the vibrations , the purple spectrum is that new fellow , the white one is the old one .
and the prediction is it should smell of coumarin .
they made it ... and it smelled exactly like coumarin .
and this is our new baby , called tonkene .
you see , when you 're a scientist , you 're always selling ideas .
and people are very resistant to ideas , and rightly so .
why should new ideas be accepted ?
but when you put a little 10 - gram vial on the table in front of perfumers and it smells like coumarin , and it is n't coumarin , and you 've found it in three weeks , this focuses everybody 's mind wonderfully .
and people often ask me , is your theory accepted ?
and i said , well , by whom ? i mean most , you know -- there 's three attitudes : you 're right , and i do n't know why , which is the most rational one at this point .
you 're right , and i do n't care how you do it , in a sense ; you bring me the molecules , you know .
and : you 're completely wrong , and i 'm sure you 're completely wrong .
ok ? now , we 're dealing with people who only want results , and this is the commercial world .
and they tell us that even if we do it by astrology , they 're happy .
but we 're not actually doing it by astrology .
but for the last three years , i 've had what i consider to be the best job in the entire universe , which is to put my hobby -- which is , you know , fragrance and all the magnificent things -- plus a little bit of biophysics , a small amount of self - taught chemistry at the service of something that actually works .
thank you very much .
