for me they normally happen , these career crises , often , actually , on a sunday evening , just as the sun is starting to set , and the gap between my hopes for myself , and the reality of my life , start to diverge so painfully that i normally end up weeping into a pillow .
i 'm mentioning all this , i 'm mentioning all this because i think this is not merely a personal problem .
you may think i 'm wrong in this , but i think that we live in an age when our lives are regularly punctuated by career crises , by moments when what we thought we knew , about our lives , about our careers , comes into contact with a threatening sort of reality .
it 's perhaps easier now than ever before to make a good living .
it 's perhaps harder than ever before to stay calm , to be free of career anxiety .
i want to look now , if i may , at some of the reasons why we might be feeling anxiety about our careers .
why we might be victims of these career crises , as we 're weeping softly into our pillows .
one of the reasons why we might be suffering is that we are surrounded by snobs .
in a way , i 've got some bad news , particularly to anybody who 's come to oxford from abroad .
there is a real problem with snobbery .
because sometimes people from outside the u.k.
imagine that snobbery is a distinctively u.k. phenomenon fixated on country houses and titles .
the bad news is that 's not true .
snobbery is a global phenomenon .
we are a global organization . this is a global phenomenon .
it exists . what is a snob ?
a snob is anybody who takes a small part of you and uses that to come to a complete vision of who you are .
that is snobbery .
the dominant kind of snobbery that exists nowadays is job snobbery .
you encounter it within minutes at a party , when you get asked that famous iconic question of the early 21st century , " what do you do ? "
and according to how you answer that question , people are either incredibly delighted to see you , or look at their watch and make their excuses .
now , the opposite of a snob is your mother .
not necessarily your mother , or indeed mine , but , as it were , the ideal mother , somebody who does n't care about your achievements .
but unfortunately , most people are not our mothers .
most people make a strict correlation between how much time , and if you like , love -- not romantic love , though that may be something -- but love in general , respect , they are willing to accord us , that will be strictly defined by our position in the social hierarchy .
and that 's a lot of the reason why we care so much about our careers and indeed start caring so much about material goods .
you know , we 're often told that we live in very materialistic times , that we 're all greedy people .
i do n't think we are particularly materialistic .
i think we live in a society which has simply pegged certain emotional rewards to the acquisition of material goods .
it 's not the material goods we want . it 's the rewards we want .
and that 's a new way of looking at luxury goods .
the next time you see somebody driving a ferrari do n't think , " this is somebody who is greedy . "
think , " this is somebody who is incredibly vulnerable and in need of love . "
in other words -- feel sympathy , rather than contempt .
there are other reasons -- there are other reasons why it 's perhaps harder now to feel calm than ever before .
one of these , and it 's paradoxical because it 's linked to something that 's rather nice , is the hope we all have for our careers .
never before have expectations been so high about what human beings can achieve with their lifespan .
we 're told , from many sources , that anyone can achieve anything .
we 've done away with the caste system .
we are now in a system where anyone can rise to any position they please .
and it 's a beautiful idea .
along with that is a kind of spirit of equality . we 're all basically equal .
there are no strictly defined kind of hierarchies .
there is one really big problem with this , and that problem is envy .
envy , it 's a real taboo to mention envy , but if there is one dominant emotion in modern society , that is envy .
and it 's linked to the spirit of equality . let me explain .
i think it would be very unusual for anyone here , or anyone watching , to be envious of the queen of england .
even though she is much richer than any of you are .
and she 's got a very large house .
the reason why we do n't envy her is because she 's too weird .
she 's simply too strange .
we ca n't relate to her . she speaks in a funny way .
she comes from an odd place .
so we ca n't relate to her . and when you ca n't relate to somebody , you do n't envy them .
the closer two people are , in age , in background , in the process of identification , the more there is a danger of envy -- which is incidentally why none of you should ever go to a school reunion -- because there is no stronger reference point than people one was at school with .
but the problem , generally , of modern society , is that it turns the whole world into a school . everybody is wearing jeans , everybody is the same .
and yet , they 're not .
so there is a spirit of equality , combined with deep inequalities .
which makes for a very -- can make for a very stressful situation .
it 's probably as unlikely that you would nowadays become as rich and famous as bill gates , as it was unlikely in the 17th century that you would accede to the ranks of the french aristocracy .
but the point is , it does n't feel that way .
it 's made to feel , by magazines and other media outlets , that if you 've got energy , a few bright ideas about technology , a garage , you too could start a major thing .
and the consequences of this problem make themselves felt in bookshops .
when you go to a large bookshop and look at the self - help sections , as i sometimes do , if you analyze self - help books that are produced in the world today , there are basically two kinds .
the first kind tells you , " you can do it ! you can make it ! anything is possible ! "
and the other kind tells you how to cope with what we politely call " low self - esteem , " or impolitely call " feeling very bad about yourself . "
there is a real correlationship , a real correlation between a society that tells people that they can do anything and the existence of low self - esteem .
so that 's another way in which something that is quite positive can have a nasty kickback .
there is another reason why we might be feeling more anxious , about our careers , about our status in the world today , than ever before .
and it is , again , linked to something nice , and that nice thing is called meritocracy .
everybody , all politicians on left and right , agree that meritocracy is a great thing , and we should all be trying to make our societies really , really meritocratic .
in other words , what is a meritocratic society ?
a meritocratic society is one in which if you 've got talent and energy and skill , you will get to the top . nothing should hold you back .
it 's a beautiful idea . the problem is if you really believe in a society where those who merit to get to the top , get to the top , you 'll also , by implication , and in a far more nasty way , believe in a society where those who deserve to get to the bottom also get to the bottom and stay there .
in other words , your position in life comes to seem not accidental , but merited and deserved .
and that makes failure seem much more crushing .
you know , in the middle ages , in england , when you met a very poor person , that person would be described as an " unfortunate " -- literally , somebody who had not been blessed by fortune , an unfortunate .
nowadays , particularly in the united states , if you meet someone at the bottom of society , they may unkindly be described as a " loser . "
there is a real difference between an unfortunate and a loser , and that shows 400 years of evolution in society and our belief in who is responsible for our lives .
it 's no longer the gods , it 's us . we 're in the driving seat .
that 's exhilarating if you 're doing well , and very crushing if you 're not .
it leads , in the worst cases , in the analysis of a sociologist like emil durkheim , it leads to increased rates of suicide .
there are more suicides in developed individualistic countries than in any other part of the world .
and some of the reason for that is that people take what happens to them extremely personally .
they own their success . but they also own their failure .
is there any relief from some of these pressures that i 've just been outlining ?
i think there is . i just want to turn to a few of them .
let 's take meritocracy .
this idea that everybody deserves to get where they get to , i think it 's a crazy idea , completely crazy .
i will support any politician of left and right , with any halfway decent meritocratic idea .
i am a meritocrat in that sense .
but i think it 's insane to believe that we will ever make a society that is genuinely meritocratic . it 's an impossible dream .
the idea that we will make a society where literally everybody is graded , the good at the top , and the bad at the bottom , and it 's exactly done as it should be , is impossible .
there are simply too many random factors : accidents , accidents of birth , accidents of things dropping on people 's heads , illnesses , etc.
we will never get to grade them , never get to grade people as they should .
i 'm drawn to a lovely quote by st. augustine in " the city of god , " where he says , " it 's a sin to judge any man by his post . "
in modern english that would mean it 's a sin to come to any view of who you should talk to dependent on their business card .
it 's not the post that should count .
according to st. augustine , it 's only god who can really put everybody in their place .
and he 's going to do that on the day of judgment with angels and trumpets , and the skies will open .
insane idea , if you 're a secularist person , like me .
but something very valuable in that idea , nevertheless .
in other words , hold your horses when you 're coming to judge people .
you do n't necessarily know what someone 's true value is .
that is an unknown part of them .
and we should n't behave as though it is known .
there is another source of solace and comfort for all this .
when we think about failing in life , when we think about failure , one of the reasons why we fear failing is not just a loss of income , a loss of status .
what we fear is the judgment and ridicule of others . and it exists .
you know , the number one organ of ridicule nowadays , is the newspaper .
and if you open the newspaper any day of the week , it 's full of people who 've messed up their lives .
they 've slept with the wrong person . they 've taken the wrong substance .
they 've passed the wrong piece of legislation . whatever it is .
and then are fit for ridicule .
in other words , they have failed . and they are described as " losers . "
now is there any alternative to this ?
i think the western tradition shows us one glorious alternative , and that is tragedy .
tragic art , as it developed in the theaters of ancient greece , in the fifth century b.c. , was essentially an art form devoted to tracing how people fail , and also according them a level of sympathy , which ordinary life would not necessarily accord them .
i remember a few years ago , i was thinking about all this , and i went to see " the sunday sport , " a tabloid newspaper that i do n't recommend you to start reading if you 're not familiar with it already .
i went to talk to them about certain of the great tragedies of western art .
i wanted to see how they would seize the bare bones of certain stories if they came in as a news item at the news desk on a saturday afternoon .
so i told them about othello . they had not heard of it but were fascinated by it .
and i asked them to write the headline for the story of othello .
they came up with " love - crazed immigrant kills senator 's daughter " splashed across the headline .
i gave them the plotline of madame bovary .
again , a book they were enchanted to discover .
and they wrote " shopaholic adulteress swallows arsenic after credit fraud . "
and then my favorite .
they really do have a kind of genius all of their own , these guys .
my favorite is sophocles ' oedipus the king : " sex with mum was blinding " in a way , if you like , at one end of the spectrum of sympathy , you 've got the tabloid newspaper .
at the other end of the spectrum you 've got tragedy and tragic art , and i suppose i 'm arguing that we should learn a little bit about what 's happening in tragic art .
it would be insane to call hamlet a loser .
he is not a loser , though he has lost .
and i think that is the message of tragedy to us , and why it 's so very , very important , i think .
the other thing about modern society and why it causes this anxiety is that we have nothing at its center that is non - human .
we are the first society to be living in a world where we do n't worship anything other than ourselves .
we think very highly of ourselves , and so we should .
we 've put people on the moon . we 've done all sorts of extraordinary things .
and so we tend to worship ourselves .
our heroes are human heroes .
that 's a very new situation .
most other societies have had , right at their center , the worship of something transcendent : a god , a spirit , a natural force , the universe , whatever it is , something else that is being worshiped .
we 've slightly lost the habit of doing that , which is , i think , why we 're particularly drawn to nature .
not for the sake of our health , though it 's often presented that way , but because it 's an escape from the human anthill .
it 's an escape from our own competition , and our own dramas .
and that 's why we enjoy looking at glaciers and oceans , and contemplating the earth from outside its perimeters , etc.
we like to feel in contact with something that is non - human , and that is so deeply important to us .
what i think i 've been talking about really is success and failure .
and one of the interesting things about success is that we think we know what it means .
if i said to you that there is somebody behind the screen who is very very successful , certain ideas would immediately come to mind .
you would think that person might have made a lot of money , achieved renown in some field .
my own theory of success -- and i 'm somebody who is very interested in success . i really want to be successful .
i 'm always thinking , " how could i be more successful ? "
but as i get older , i 'm also very nuanced about what that word " success " might mean .
here 's an insight that i 've had about success .
you ca n't be successful at everything .
we hear a lot of talk about work - life balance .
nonsense . you ca n't have it all . you ca n't .
so any vision of success has to admit what it 's losing out on , where the element of loss is .
i think any wise life will accept , as i say , that there is going to be an element where we are not succeeding .
thing about a successful life is , a lot of the time , our ideas of what it would mean to live successfully are not our own .
they are sucked in from other people : chiefly , if you 're a man , your father , and if you 're a woman , your mother .
psychoanalysis has been drumming home this message for about 80 years .
no one is quite listening hard enough , but i very much believe that that 's true .
and we also suck in messages from everything from the television , to advertising , to marketing , etc.
these are hugely powerful forces that define what we want and how we view ourselves .
when we 're told that banking is a very respectable profession a lot of us want to go into banking .
when banking is no longer so respectable , we lose interest in banking .
we are highly open to suggestion .
so what i want to argue for is not that we should give up on our ideas of success , but we should make sure that they are our own .
we should focus in on our ideas .
and make sure that we own them , that we are truly the authors of our own ambitions .
because it 's bad enough , not getting what you want , but it 's even worse to have an idea of what it is you want and find out at the end of a journey , that it is n't , in fact , what you wanted all along .
so i 'm going to end it there .
but what i really want to stress is by all means , success , yes .
but let 's accept the strangeness of some of our ideas .
let 's probe away at our notions of success .
let 's make sure our ideas of success are truly our own .
thank you very much .
chris anderson : that was fascinating . how do you reconcile this idea of someone being -- it being bad to think of someone as a loser with the idea , that a lot of people like , of seizing control of your life .
and that a society that encourages that perhaps has to have some winners and losers .
alain de botton : yes . i think it 's merely the randomness of the winning and losing process that i wanted to stress .
because the emphasis nowadays is so much on the justice of everything , and politicians always talk about justice .
now i am a firm believer in justice , i just think that it is impossible .
so we should do everything we can , we should do everything we can to pursue it .
but at the end of the day we should always remember that whoever is facing us , whatever has happened in their lives , there will be a strong element of the haphazard .
and it 's that that i 'm trying to leave room for .
because otherwise it can get quite claustrophobic .
ca : i mean , do you believe that you can combine your kind of kinder , gentler philosophy of work with a successful economy ?
or do you think that you ca n't ?
but it does n't matter that much that we 're putting too much emphasis on that ?
ab : the nightmare thought is that frightening people is the best way to get work out of them , and that somehow the crueler the environment the more people will rise to the challenge .
you want to think , who would you like as your ideal dad ?
and your ideal dad is somebody who is tough but gentle .
and it 's a very hard line to make .
we need fathers , as it were , the exemplary father figures in society , avoiding the two extremes , which is the authoritarian , disciplinarian , on the one hand , and on the other , the lax , no rules option .
ca : alain de botton .
ab : thank you very much .
