it 's not about technology , it 's about people and stories .
i could show you what recently was on television as a high quality video : 60 minutes , many of you may have seen it .
and it was the now director of the entire piece of the veteran 's administration -- who , himself , had lost an arm 39 years ago who was adamantly opposed to these crazy devices that do n't work .
and it turns out that with 60 minutes cameras rolling in the background , after he pretty much made his position clear on this -- he had his hook and he had his -- he wore this arm for less than two hours and was able to pour himself a drink and got quite emotional over the fact that , quote -- his quote -- it 's the first time he 's felt like he 's had an arm in 39 years .
but that would sort of be jumping to the middle of the story , and i 'm not going to show you that polished video .
i 'm going to , instead , in a minute or two , show you an early , crude video because i think it 's a better way to tell a story .
a few years ago i was visited by the guy that runs darpa , the people that fund all the advanced technologies that businesses and universities probably would n't take the risk of doing .
they have a particular interest in ones that will help our soldiers .
i get this sort of unrequested -- by me anyway -- visit , and sitting in my conference room is a very senior surgeon from the military and the guy that runs darpa .
they proceed to tell me a story which comes down to basically the following . we have used such advanced technologies now and made them available in the most remote places that we put soldiers : hills of afghanistan , iraq ...
they were quite proud of the fact that you know , before the dust clears , if some soldier has been hurt they will have collected him or her , they will have brought him back , they will be getting world - class triage emergency care faster than you and i would be getting it if we were hurt in a car accident in a major city in the united states .
that 's the good news .
the bad news is if they 've collected this person and he or she is missing an arm or leg , part of the face , it 's probably not coming back .
so , they started giving me the statistics on how many of these kids had lost an arm .
and then the surgeon pointed out , with a lot of anger , he said , " why is it ? at the end of the civil war , they were shooting each other with muskets . if somebody lost an arm , we gave them a wooden stick with a hook on it .
now we 've got f 18s and f 22s , and if somebody loses an arm , we give them a plastic stick with a hook on it . "
and they basically said , " this is unacceptable , " and then the punchline : " so , dean , we 're here because you make medical stuff .
you 're going to give us an arm . "
and i was waiting for the 500 pages of bureaucracy , paperwork and dods .
no , the guy says , " we 're going to bring a guy into this conference room , and wearing the arm you 're going to give us , he or she is going to pick up a raisin or a grape off this table .
if it 's the grape , they wo n't break it . "
great he needs efferent , afferent , haptic response sensors .
" if it 's the raisin , they wo n't drop it . "
so he wants fine motor control : flex at the wrist , flex at the elbow , abduct and flex at the shoulder .
either way they were going to eat it .
" oh , by the way dean . it 's going to fit on a 50th percentile female frame -- namely 32 inches from the long finger -- and weigh less than nine pounds . "
50th percentile female frame .
" and it 's going to be completely self contained including all its power . "
so , they finished that . and i , as you can tell , am a bashful guy .
i told them they 're nuts .
they 've been watching too much " terminator . "
then , the surgeon says to me , " dean , you need to know more than two dozen of these kids have come back bilateral . "
now , i cannot imagine -- i 'm sorry , you may have a better imagination than i do -- i ca n't imagine losing my arm , and typically at 22 years old .
but compared to that , losing two ?
seems like that would be an inconvenience .
anyway , i went home that night . i thought about it .
i literally could not sleep thinking about , " i wonder how you 'd roll over with no shoulders . "
so , i decided we 've got to do this .
and trust me , i 've got a day job , i 've got a lot of day jobs .
most of my day job keeps me busy funding my fantasies like first and water and power ....
and i 've got a lot of day jobs .
but i figured i gotta do this .
did a little investigation , went down to washington , told them i still think they 're nuts but we 're going to do it .
and i told them i 'd build them an arm .
i told them it would probably take five years to get through the fda , and probably 10 years to be reasonably functional .
look what it takes to make things like ipods .
" great , " he said , " you got two years . "
i said , " i 'll tell you what . i 'll build you an arm that 's under nine pounds that has all that capability in one year .
it will take the other nine to make it functional and useful . "
we sort of agreed to disagree .
i went back and i started putting a team together , the best guys i could find with a passion to do this .
at the end of exactly one year we had a device with 14 degrees of freedom , all the sensors , all the microprocessors , all the stuff inside .
i could show you it with a cosmesis on it that 's so real it 's eerie , but then you would n't see all this cool stuff .
i then thought it would be years before we 'd be able to make it really , really useful .
it turned out , as i think you could see in aimee 's capabilities and attitudes , people with a desire to do something are quite remarkable and nature is quite adaptable .
anyway , with less than 10 hours of use , two guys -- one that 's bilateral .
he 's literally , he 's got no shoulder on one side , and he 's high trans - humeral on the other .
and that 's chuck and randy together , after 10 hours -- were playing in our office .
and we took some pretty cruddy home movies .
at the end of the one i 'm going to show , it 's only about a minute and a couple of seconds long , chuck does something that to this day i 'm jealous of , i ca n't do it .
he picks up a spoon , picks it up , scoops out some shredded wheat and milk , holds the spoon level as he translates it , moving all these joints simultaneously , to his mouth , and he does n't drop any milk .
i cannot do that .
his wife was standing behind me .
she 's standing behind me at the time and she says , " dean , chuck has n't fed himself in 19 years .
so , you 've got a choice : we keep the arm , or you keep chuck . "
so , can we see that ?
this is chuck showing simultaneous control of all the joints .
he 's punching our controls guy . the guy behind him is our engineer / surgeon , which is a convenient guy to have around .
there 's randy , these guys are passing a rubber little puck between them .
and just as in the spirit of first , gracious professionalism , they are quite proud of this , so they decide to share a drink .
this is a non - trivial thing to do , by the way .
imagine doing that with a wooden stick and a hook on the end of it , doing either of those .
now chuck is doing something quite extraordinary , at least for my limited physical skill .
and now he 's going to do what darpa asked me for .
he 's going to pick up a grape -- he did n't drop it , he did n't break it -- and he 's going to eat it .
so , that 's where we were at the end of about 15 months .
but , as i 've learned from richard , the technology , the processors , the sensors , the motors , is not the story .
i had n't dealt with this kind of problem or frankly , this whole segment of the medical world .
i 'll give you some astounding things that have happened as we started this .
after we were pretty much convinced we had a good design , and we 'd have to make all the standard engineering trade - offs you always make -- you can always get three out of four of anything you want ; the weight , the size , the cost , the functionality -- i put a bunch of guys in my plane and i said , " we 're flying down to walter reed , and we 're going talk to these kids , because frankly it does n't matter whether we like this arm .
it does n't matter whether the department of defense likes this arm . "
when i told them that they were n't entirely enthusiastic , but i told them , " it really does n't matter what their opinion is .
there is only one opinion that matters , the kids that are either going to use it or not . "
i told a bunch of my engineers , " look we 're going to walk into walter reed , and you 're going to see people , lots of them , missing major body parts .
they 're probably going to be angry , depressed , frustrated .
we 're probably going to have to give them support , encouragement .
but we 've got to extract from them enough information to make sure we 're doing the right thing . "
we walked into walter reed and i could not have been more wrong .
we did see a bunch of people , a lot of them missing a lot of body parts , and parts they had left were burned ; half a face gone , an ear burned off .
they were sitting at a table . they were brought together for us .
and we started asking them all questions .
" look , " i 'd say to them , " we 're not quite as good as nature yet .
i could give you fine motor control , or i could let you curl 40 pounds ; i probably ca n't do both .
i can give you fast control with low reduction ratios in these gears , or i can give you power ; i ca n't give you both .
and we were trying to get them to all help us know what to give them .
not only were they enthusiastic , they kept thinking they 're there to help us .
" well , would it help if i . . . "
" guys , and woman , you 've given enough .
we 're here to help you . we need data . we need to know what you need . "
after a half an hour , maybe , there was one guy at the far end of the table who was n't saying much .
you could see he was missing an arm .
he was leaning on his other arm .
i called down to the end , " hey , you have n't said much .
if we needed this or this , what would you want ? "
and he said , " you know , i 'm the lucky guy at this table .
i lost my right arm , but i 'm a lefty . "
so , he would n't say much .
he had a great spirit , like all the rest of them had great spirits .
and he made a few comments .
and then the meeting ended . we said goodbye to all these guys .
and that guy pushed himself back from the table ...
he has no legs .
so , we left .
and i was thinking , " we did n't give them support and encouragement ; they gave it to us .
they 're not finished giving yet . "
it was astounding .
so , we went back .
and i started working harder , faster .
then we went out to brooke army medical center .
and we saw lots of these kids , lots of them .
and it was astounding how positive they are .
so , we went back , and we 've been working harder yet .
we 're in clinical trials , we 've got five of them on people .
we 're screaming along .
and i get a call and we go back to washington .
we go back to walter reed , and a kid , literally , 20 some - odd days before that was blown up .
and they shipped him to germany and 24 hours later they shipped him from germany to walter reed .
and he was there , and they said we needed to come .
and i went down and they rolled him into a room .
he 's got no legs .
he 's got no arms .
he 's got a small residual limb on one side .
half of his face is gone , but they said his vision is coming back .
he had one good eye .
his name is brandon marrocco .
and he said , " i need your arms , but i need two of them . "
" you 'll get them . "
this kid was from staten island .
and he said , " i had a truck , before i went over there , and it had a stick .
you think i 'll be able to drive it ? "
" sure . "
and i turned around and went , " how are we going to do this ? "
anyway , he was just like all the rest of them .
he does n't really want a lot .
he wants to help . he told me that he wanted to go back to help his buddies .
so , i was on my way out here .
i was asked to stop at texas .
there were 3,500 people , the veteran 's administration , u.s. ... just 3,500 at this huge event to help the families of all the kids -- some that have died , some that are like brandon -- and they wanted me to speak .
i said , " what am i going to say ?
this is not a happy thing . look , if this happens to you , i can give you ... this stuff is still not as good at the original equipment . "
" you need to come . "
so , i went .
and , as i think you get the point , there were a lot people there recovering .
some further along than others .
but universally , these people that had been through this had astounding attitudes , and just the fact that people care makes a huge difference to them .
i 'll shut up , except one message or concern i have .
i do n't think anybody does it intentionally , but there were people there literally talking about , " well , how much will they get ? "
you know , this country is involved as we 've all heard , in this great healthcare debate .
" who is entitled to what ?
who is entitled to how much ?
who is going to pay for it ? "
those are tough questions .
i do n't have an answer to that . not everybody can be entitled to everything simply because you were born here .
it 's not possible . it would be nice but let 's be realistic .
they were tough questions . there 's polarized groups down there .
i do n't know the answers .
there are other questions that are tough .
" should we be there ?
how do we get out ?
what do we need to do ? " there 's very polarized answers to that question too , and i do n't have any answers to that .
those are political questions , economic questions , strategic questions .
i do n't have the answer . but let me give you a simple concern or maybe statement , then .
it is an easy answer .
i know what these kids deserve on the healthcare side .
i was talking to one of them , and he was really liking this arm -- it 's way , way , way better than a plastic stick with a hook on it -- but there 's nobody in this room that would rather have that than the one you got .
but i was saying to him , " you know , the first airplane went 100 feet in 1903 .
wilbur and orville .
but you know what ? it would n't have made an old pigeon jealous .
but now we got eagles out there , f 15s , even that bald eagle .
i 've never seen a bird flying around at mach 2 .
i think eventually we 'll make these things extraordinary . "
and i said to that kid , " i 'll stop when your buddies are envious of your luke arm because of what it can do , and how it does it .
and we 'll keep working . and i 'm not going to stop working until we do that . "
and i think this country ought to continue its great debate , whining and complaining , " i 'm entitled . " " you 're a victim . "
and whining and complaining about what our foreign policy ought to be .
but while we have the luxury of whining and complaining about who 's paying for what and how much we get , the people that are out there giving us that great privilege of whining and complaining , i know what they deserve : everything humanly possible .
and we ought to give it to them .
