i 'm a believer .
i 'm a believer in global warming , and my record is good on the subject .
but my subject is national security .
we have to get off of oil purchased from the enemy .
i 'm talking about opec oil .
and let me take you back 100 years to 1912 .
you 're probably thinking that was my birth year .
it was n't . it was 1928 .
but go back to 1912 , 100 years ago , and look at that point what we , our country , was faced with .
it 's the same energy question that you 're looking at today , but it 's different sources of fuel .
a hundred years ago we were looking at coal , of course , and we were looking at whale oil and we were looking at crude oil .
at that point , we were looking for a fuel that was cleaner , it was cheaper , and it was n't ours though , it was theirs .
so at that point , 1912 , we selected crude oil over whale oil and some more coal .
but as we moved on to the period now , 100 years later , we 're back really at another decision point .
what is the decision point ?
it 's what we 're going to use in the future .
so from here , it 's pretty clear to me , we would prefer to have cleaner , cheaper , and we have that , we have that -- which is natural gas .
so here you are , that the cost of all this to the world is 89 million barrels of oil , give or take a few barrels , every day .
and the cost annually is three trillion dollars .
and one trillion of that goes to opec .
that has got to be stopped .
now if you look at the cost of opec , it cost seven trillion dollars -- on the milken institute study last year -- seven trillion dollars since 1976 , is what we paid for oil from opec .
now that includes the cost of military and the cost of the fuel both .
but it 's the greatest transfer of wealth , from one group to another in the history of mankind .
and it continues .
now when you look at where is the transfer of wealth , you can see here that we have the arrows going into the mid - east and away from us .
and with that , we have found ourselves to be the world 's policemen .
we are policing the world , and how are we doing that ?
i know the response to this .
i would bet there are n't 10 percent of you in the room that know how many aircraft carriers there are in the world .
raise your hand if you think you know .
there are 12 .
one is under construction by the chinese and the other 11 belong to us .
why do we have 11 aircraft carriers ?
do we have a corner on the market ?
are we smarter than anybody else ? i 'm not sure .
if you look at where they 're located -- and on this slide it 's the red blobs on there -- there are five that are operating in the mid - east , and the rest of them are in the united states .
they just move back to the mid - east and those come back .
so actually most of the 11 we have are tied up in the mid - east .
why ? why are they in the mid - east ?
they 're there to control , keep the shipping lanes open and make oil available .
and the united states uses about 20 million barrels a day , which is about 25 percent of all the oil used everyday in the world .
and we 're doing it with four percent of the population .
somehow that does n't seem right .
that 's not sustainable .
so where do we go from here ?
does that continue ?
yes , it 's going to continue .
the slide you 're looking at here is 1990 to 2040 .
over that period you are going to double your demand .
and when you look at what we 're using the oil for , 70 percent of it is used for transportation fuel .
so when somebody says , " let 's go more nuclear , let 's go wind , let 's go solar , " fine ; i 'm for anything american , anything american .
but if you 're going to do anything about the dependency on foreign oil , you have to address transportation .
so here we are using 20 million barrels a day -- producing eight , importing 12 , and from the 12 , five comes from opec .
when you look at the biggest user and the second largest user , we use 20 million barrels and the chinese use 10 .
the chinese have a little bit better plan -- or they have a plan ; we have no plan .
in the history of america , we 've never had an energy plan .
we do n't even realize the resources that we have available to us .
if you take the last 10 years and bring forward , you 've transferred to opec a trillion dollars .
if you go forward the next 10 years and cap the price of oil at 100 dollars a barrel , you will pay 2.2 trillion .
that 's not sustainable either .
but the days of cheap oil are over .
they 're over .
they make it very clear to you , the saudis do , they have to have 94 dollars a barrel to make their social commitments .
now i had people in washington last week told me , he said , " the saudis can produce the oil for five dollars a barrel .
that has nothing to do with it .
it 's what they have to pay for is what we are going to pay for oil . "
there is no free market for oil .
the oil is priced off the margin .
and the opec nations are the ones that price the oil .
so where are we headed from here ?
we 're headed to natural gas .
natural gas will do everything we want it to do .
it 's 130 octane fuel .
it 's 25 percent cleaner than oil .
it 's ours , we have an abundance of it .
and it does not require a refinery .
it comes out of the ground at 130 octane .
run it through the separator and you 're ready to use it .
it 's going to be very simple for us to use .
it 's going to be simple to accomplish this .
you 're going to find , and i 'll tell you in just a minute , what you 're looking for to make it happen .
but here you can look at the list .
natural gas will fit all of those .
it will replace or be able to be used for that .
it 's for power generation , transportation , it 's peaking fuel , it 's all those .
do we have enough natural gas ?
look at the bar on the left . it 's 24 trillion .
it 's what we use a year .
go forward and the estimates that you have from the eia and onto the industry estimates -- the industry knows what they 're talking about -- we 've got 4,000 trillion cubic feet of natural gas that 's available to us .
how does that translate to barrels of oil equivalent ?
it would be three times what the saudis claim they have .
and they claim they have 250 billion barrels of oil , which i do not believe .
i think it 's probably 175 billion barrels .
but anyway , whether they say they 're right or whatever , we have plenty of natural gas .
so i have tried to target on where we use the natural gas .
and where i 've targeted is on the heavy - duty trucks .
there are eight million of them .
you take eight million trucks -- these are 18 - wheelers -- and take them to natural gas , reduce carbon by 30 percent , it is cheaper and it will cut our imports three million barrels .
so you will cut 60 percent off of opec with eight million trucks .
there are 250 million vehicles in america .
so what you have is natural gas is the bridge fuel , is the way i see it .
i do n't have to worry about the bridge to where at my age .
that 's your concern .
but when you look at the natural gas we have it could very well be the bridge to natural gas , because you have plenty of natural gas .
but as i said , i 'm for anything american .
now let me take you -- i 've been a realist -- i went from theorist early to realist .
i 'm back to theorist again .
if you look at the world , you have methane hydrates in the ocean around every continent .
and here you can see methane , if that 's the way you 're going to go , that there 's plenty of methane -- natural gas is methane , methane and natural gas are interchangeable -- but if you decide that you 're going to use some methane -- and i 'm gone , so it 's up to you -- but we do have plenty of methane hydrates .
so i think i 've made my point that we have to get on our own resources in america .
if we do -- it 's costing us a billion dollars a day for oil .
and yet , we have no energy plan .
so there 's nothing going on that impresses me in washington on that plan , other than i 'm trying to focus on that eight million 18 - wheelers .
if we could do that , i think we would take our first step to an energy plan .
if we did , we could see that our own resources are easier to use than anybody can imagine .
thank you .
chris anderson : thanks for that .
so from your point of view , you had this great pickens plan that was based on wind energy , and you abandoned it basically because the economics changed .
what happened ?
tbp : i lost 150 million dollars .
that 'll make you abandon something .
no , what happened to us , chris , is that power , it 's priced off the margin .
and so the margin is natural gas .
and at the time i went into the wind business , natural gas was nine dollars .
today it 's two dollars and forty cents .
you cannot do a wind deal under six dollars an mcf .
ca : so what happened was that , through increased ability to use fracking technology , the calculated reserves of natural gas kind of exploded and the price plummeted , which made wind uncompetitive .
in a nutshell that 's what happened ?
tbp : that 's what happened .
we found out that we could go to the source rock , which were the carboniferous shales in the basins .
the first one was barnett shale in texas and then the marcellus up in the northeast across new york , pennsylvania , west virginia ; and haynesville in louisiana .
this stuff is everywhere .
we are overwhelmed with natural gas .
ca : and now you 're a big investor in that and bringing that to market ?
tbp : well you say a big investor .
it 's my life .
i 'm a geologist , got out of school in '51 , and i 've been in the industry my entire life .
now i do own stocks .
i 'm not a big natural gas producer .
somebody the other day said i was the second largest natural gas producer in the united states .
do n't i wish .
but no , i 'm not . i own stocks .
but i also am in the fueling business .
ca : but natural gas is a fossil fuel .
you burn it , you release co 2 .
so you believe in the threat of climate change .
why does n't that prospect concern you ?
tbp : well you 're going to have to use something .
what do you have to replace it ?
ca : no , no. the argument that it 's a bridge fuel makes sense , because the amount of co 2 per unit of energy is lower than oil and coal , correct ?
and so everyone can be at least happy to see a shift from coal or oil to natural gas .
but if that 's it and that becomes the reason that renewables do n't get invested in , then , long - term , we 're screwed anyway , right ?
tbp : well i 'm not ready to give up , but jim and i talked there as he left , and i said , " how do you feel about natural gas ? "
and he said , " well it 's a bridge fuel , is what it is . "
and i said , " bridge to what ?
where are we headed ? "
see but again , i told you , i do n't have to worry with that .
you all do .
ca : but i do n't think that 's right , boone .
i think you 're a person who believes in your legacy .
you 've made the money you need .
you 're one of the few people in a position to really swing the debate .
do you support the idea of some kind of price on carbon ?
does that make sense ?
tbp : i do n't like that because it ends up the government is going to run the program .
i can tell you it will be a failure .
the government is not successful on these things .
they just are n't , it 's a bad deal .
look at solyndra , or whatever it was .
i mean , that was told to be a bad idea 10 times , they went ahead and did it anyway .
but that only blew out 500 million .
i think it 's closer to a billion .
but chris , i think where we 're headed , the long - term , i do n't mind going back to nuclear .
and i can tell you what the last page of the report that will take them five years to write will be .
one , do n't build a reformer on a fault .
and number two , do not build a reformer on the ocean .
and now i think reformers are safe .
move them inland and on very stable ground and build the reformers .
there is n't anything wrong with nuke .
you 're going to have to have energy . there is no question .
you ca n't -- okay .
ca : one of the questions from the audience is , with fracking and the natural gas process , what about the problem of methane leaking from that , methane being a worse global warming gas than co 2 ?
is that a concern ?
tbp : fracking ? what is fracking ?
ca : fracking .
tbp : i 'm teasing .
ca : we 've got a little bit of accent incompatibility here , you know .
tbp : no , let me tell you , i 've told you what my age was .
i got out of school in '51 .
i witnessed my first frack job at border texas in 1953 .
fracking came out in '47 , and do n't believe for a minute when our president gets up there and says the department of energy 30 years ago developed fracking .
i do n't know what in the hell he 's talking about .
i mean seriously , the department of energy did not have anything to do with fracking .
the first frack job was in '47 .
i saw my first one in '53 .
i 've fracked over 3,000 wells in my life .
never had a problem with messing up an aquifer or anything else .
now the largest aquifer in north america is from midland , texas to the south dakota border , across eight states -- big aquifer : ogallala , triassic age .
there had to have been 800,000 wells fracked in oklahoma , texas , kansas in that aquifer .
there 's no problems .
i do n't understand why the media is focused on eastern pennsylvania .
ca : all right , so you do n't support a carbon tax of any kind or a price on carbon .
your picture then i guess of how the world eventually gets off fossil fuels is through innovation ultimately , that we 'll someday make solar and nuclear cost competitive ?
tbp : solar and wind , jim and i agreed on that in 13 seconds .
that is , it 's going to be a small part , because you ca n't rely on it .
ca : so how does the world get off fossil fuels ?
tbp : how do we get there ?
we have so much natural gas , a day will not come where you say , " well let 's do n't use that anymore . "
you 'll keep using it . it is the cleanest of all .
and if you look at california , they use 2,500 buses .
lamta have been on natural gas for 25 years .
the ft. worth t has been on it for 25 years .
why ? air quality was the reason they used natural gas and got away from diesel .
why are all the trash trucks today in southern california on natural gas ?
it 's because of air quality .
i know what you 're telling me , and i 'm not disagreeing with you .
how in the hell can we get off the natural gas at some point ?
and i say , that is your problem .
ca : all right , so it 's the bridge fuel .
what is at the other end of that bridge is for this audience to figure out .
if someone comes to you with a plan that really looks like it might be part of this solution , are you ready to invest in those technologies , even if they are n't maximized for profits , they might be maximized for the future health of the planet ?
tbp : i lost 150 million on the wind , okay .
yeah , sure , i 'm game for it .
because , again , i 'm trying to get energy solved for america .
and anything american will work for me .
ca : boone , i really , really appreciate you coming here , engaging in this conversation .
i think there 's a lot of people who will want to engage with you .
and that was a real gift you gave this audience .
thank you so much .
