on simplicity . what a great way to start .
first of all , i 've been watching this trend where we have these books like such and such " for dummies . "
do you know these books , these such and such " for dummies ? "
my daughters pointed out that i 'm very similar looking , so this is a bit of a problem .
but i was looking online at amazon.com for other books like this .
you know , there 's also something called the " complete idiot 's guide ? "
there 's a sort of business model around being stupid in some sense .
we like to have technology make us feel bad , for some strange reason .
but i really like that , so i wrote a book called " the laws of simplicity . "
i was in milan last week , for the italian launch .
it 's kind of a book about questions , questions about simplicity .
very few answers . i 'm also wondering myself , what is simplicity ?
is it good ? is it bad ? is complexity better ? i 'm not sure .
after i wrote " the laws of simplicity , " i was very tired of simplicity , as you can imagine .
and so in my life , i 've discovered that vacation is the most important skill for any kind of over - achiever .
because your companies will always take away your life , but they can never take away your vacation -- in theory .
so , i went to the cape last summer to hide from simplicity , and i went to the gap , because i only have black pants .
so i went and bought khaki shorts or whatever , and unfortunately , their branding was all about " keep it simple . "
i opened up a magazine , and visa 's branding was , " business takes simplicity . "
i develop photographs , and kodak said , " keep it simple . "
so , i felt kind of weird that simplicity was sort of following me around .
so , i turned on the tv , and i do n't watch tv very much , but you know this person ? this is paris hilton , apparently .
and she has this show , " the simple life . "
so i watched this . it 's not very simple , a little bit confusing .
so , i looked for a different show to watch .
so , i opened up this tv guide thing , and on the e ! channel , this " simple life " show is very popular .
they 'll play it over , and over , and over .
so it was traumatizing , actually .
so , i wanted to escape again , so i went out to my car .
and cape cod , there are idyllic roads , and all of us can drive in this room .
and when you drive , these signs are very important .
it 's a very simple sign , it says , " road " and " road approaching . "
so i 'm mostly driving along , okay , and then i saw this sign .
so , i thought complexity was attacking me suddenly , so i thought , " ah , simplicity . very important . "
but then i thought , " oh , simplicity . what would that be like on a beach ?
what if the sky was 41 percent gray ? would n't that be the perfect sky ? "
i mean that simplicity sky .
but in reality , the sky looked like this . it was a beautiful , complex sky .
you know , with the pinks and blues . we ca n't help but love complexity .
we 're human beings : we love complex things .
we love relationships -- very complex . so we love this kind of stuff .
i 'm at this place called the media lab.
maybe some of you guys have heard of this place .
it 's designed by i. m. pei , one of the premier modernist architects .
modernism means white box , and it 's a perfect white box .
and some of you guys are entrepreneurs , etc. , whatever .
last month , i was at google , and , boy , that cafeteria , man .
you guys have things here in silicon valley like stock options .
see , in academia , we get titles , lots of titles .
last year at ted , these were all my titles . i had a lot of titles .
i have a default title as a father of a bunch of daughters .
this year at ted , i 'm happy to report that i have new titles , in addition to my previous titles .
another " associate director of research . "
and this also happened , so i have five daughters now .
that 's my baby reina . thank you .
and so , my life is much more complex because of the baby , actually , but that 's okay . we will still stay married , i think .
but looking way back , when i was a child -- you see , i grew up in a tofu factory in seattle .
many of you may not like tofu because you have n't had good tofu , but tofu 's a good food . it 's a very simple kind of food .
it 's very hard work to make tofu .
as a child , we used to wake up at 1 a.m. and work till 6 p.m. , six days a week .
my father was kind of like andy grove , paranoid of the competition .
so often , seven days a week . family business equals child labor .
we were a great model . so , i loved going to school .
school was great , and maybe going to school helped me get to this media lab place , i 'm not sure .
thank you .
but the media lab is an interesting place , and it 's important to me because as a student , i was a computer science undergrad , and i discovered design later on in my life .
and there was this person , muriel cooper .
who knows muriel cooper ? muriel cooper ?
was n't she amazing ? muriel cooper . she was wacky .
and she was a tedster , exactly , and she showed us , she showed the world how to make the computer beautiful again .
and she 's very important in my life , because she 's the one that told me to leave mit and go to art school .
it was the best advice i ever got . so i went to art school , because of her .
she passed away in 1994 , and i was hired back to mit to try to fill her shoes , but it 's so hard .
this amazing person , muriel cooper .
when i was in japan -- i went to an art school in japan -- i had a nice sort of situation , because somehow i was connected to paul rand .
some of you guys know paul rand , the greatest graphic designer -- i 'm sorry -- out there .
the great graphic designer paul rand designed the ibm logo , the westinghouse logo .
he basically said , " i 've designed everything . "
and also ikko tanaka was a very important mentor in my life -- the paul rand of japan . he designed most of the major icons of japan , like issey miyake 's brand and also muji .
when you have mentors -- and yesterday , kareem abdul - jabbar talked about mentors , these people in your life -- the problem with mentors is that they all die .
this is a sad thing , but it 's actually a happy thing in a way , because you can remember them in their pure form .
i think that the mentors that we all meet sort of humanize us .
when you get older , and you 're all freaked out , whatever , the mentors calm us down .
and i 'm grateful for my mentors , and i 'm sure all of you are too .
because the human thing is very hard when you 're at mit .
the t does n't stand for " human , " it stands for " technology . "
and because of that , i always wondered about this human thing .
so , i 've always been googling this word , " human , " to find out how many hits i get .
and in 2001 , i had 26 million hits , and for " computer , " because computers are against humans a bit , i have 42 million hits . let me do an al gore here .
so , if you sort of compare that , like this , you 'll see that computer versus human -- i 've been tracking this for the last year -- computer versus human over the last year has changed .
it used to be kind of two to one . now , humans are catching up .
very good , us humans ! we 're catching up with the computers .
in the simplicity realm , it 's also interesting .
so if you compare complexities to simplicity , it 's also catching up in a way , too .
so , somehow humans and simplicity are intertwined , i think .
i have a confession : i 'm not a man of simplicity .
i spent my entire early career making complex stuff .
lots of complex stuff .
i wrote computer programs to make complex graphics like this .
i had clients in japan to make really complex stuff like this .
and i 've always felt bad about it , in a sense .
so , i hid in a time dimension .
i built things in a time - graphics dimension .
i did this series of calendars for shiseido .
this is a floral theme calendar in 1997 , and this is a firework calendar . so , you launch the number into space , because the japanese believe that when you see fireworks , you 're cooler for some reason .
this is why they have fireworks in the summer .
a very extreme culture .
lastly , this is a fall - based calendar , because i have so many leaves in my yard .
so this is the leaves in my yard , essentially .
and so i made a lot of these types of things .
i 've been lucky to have been there before people made these kind of things , and so i made all this kind of stuff that messes with your eyes .
i feel kind of bad about that .
tomorrow , paola antonelli is speaking . i love paola .
she has this show right now at moma , where some of these early works are here on display at moma , on the walls .
if you 're in new york , please go and see that .
but i 've had a problem , because i make all this flying stuff and people say , " oh , i know your work .
you 're the guy that makes eye candy . "
and when you 're told this , you feel kind of weird .
" eye candy " -- sort of pejorative , do n't you think ?
so , i say , " no , i make eye meat , " instead .
and eye meat is something different , something more fibrous , something more powerful , perhaps . but what could that be , eye meat ?
i 've been interested in computer programs all my life , actually .
computer programs are essentially trees , and when you make art with a computer program , there 's kind of a problem .
whenever you make art with a computer program , you 're always on the tree , and the paradox is that for excellent art , you want to be off the tree .
so , this is sort of a complication i 've found .
so , to get off the tree , i began to use my old computers .
i took these to tokyo in 2001 to make computer objects .
this is a new way to type , on my old , color classic .
you ca n't type very much on this .
i also discovered that an ir mouse responds to crt emissions and starts to move by itself , so this is a self - drawing machine .
and also , one year , the g 3 bondi blue thing -- that caddy would come out , like , dangerous , like , " whack , " like that .
but i thought , " this is very interesting . what if i make like a car crash test ? "
so i have a crash test .
and sort of measure the impact . stuff like this are things i made , just to sort of understand what these things are .
shortly after this , 9/11 happened , and i was very depressed .
i was concerned with contemporary art that was all about piss , and sort of really sad things , and so i wanted to think about something happy .
so i focused on food as my area -- these sort of clementine peel things .
in japan , it 's a wonderful thing to remove the clementine peel just in one piece . who 's done that before ? one - piece clementine ?
oh , you guys are missing out , if you have n't done it yet .
it was very good , and i discovered i can make sculptures out of this , actually , in different forms .
if you dry them quick , you can make , like , elephants and steers and stuff , and my wife did n't like these , because they mold , so i had to stop that .
so , i went back to the computer , and i bought five large fries , and scanned them all . and i was looking for some kind of food theme , and i wrote some software to automatically lay out french - fry images .
and as a child , i 'd hear that song , you know , " oh , beautiful , for spacious skies , for amber waves of grain , " so i made this amber waves image .
it 's sort of a midwest cornfield out of french fries .
and also , as a child , i was the fattest kid in class , so i used to love cheetos . oh , i love cheetos , yummy .
so , i wanted to play with cheetos in some way .
i was n't sure where to go with this . i invented cheeto paint .
cheeto paint is a very simple way to paint with cheetos .
i discovered that cheetos are good , expressive material .
and with these cheetos , i began to think , " what can i make with these cheetos ? "
and so , i began to crinkle up potato chip flecks , and also pretzels .
i was looking for some kind of form , and in the end , i made 100 butter - fries . do you get it ?
and each butter - fry is composed of different pieces .
people ask me how they make the antenna .
sometimes , they find a hair in the food . that 's my hair .
my hair 's clean -- it 's okay .
i 'm a tenured professor , which means , basically , i do n't have to work anymore .
it 's a strange business model . i can come into work everyday and staple five pieces of paper and just stare at it with my latte .
end of story .
but i realized that life could be very boring , so i 've been thinking about life , and i notice that my camera -- my digital camera versus my car , a very strange thing .
the car is so big , the camera is so small , yet the manual for the camera is so much bigger than the car manual .
it does n't make any sense .
so , i was in the cape one time , and i typed the word " simplicity , " and i discovered , in this weird , m. night shyamalan way , that i discovered [ the ] letters , m , i , t. you know the word ?
in the words " simplicity " and " complexity , " m , i , t occur in perfect sequence .
it 's a bit eerie , is n't it ?
so , i thought , maybe i 'll do this for the next twenty years or something .
and i wrote this book , " the laws of simplicity . "
it 's a very short , simple book . there are ten laws and three keys .
the ten laws and three keys -- i wo n't go over them because that 's why i have a book , and also that 's why it 's on the web for free .
but the laws are kind of like sushi in a way : there are all kinds .
in japan , they say that sushi is challenging .
you know the uni is the most challenging , so number ten is challenging .
people hate number ten like they hate uni , actually .
the three keys are easy to eat , so this is anago , cooked already , so easy to eat .
so enjoy your sushi meal later , with the laws of simplicity .
because i want to simplify them for you .
because that 's what this is about . i have to simplify this thing .
so , if i simplify the laws of simplicity , i have what 's called the cookie versus laundry thing .
anyone who has kids knows that if you offer a kid a big cookie or a small cookie , which cookie are they going to take ? the big cookie .
you can say the small cookie has godiva chocolate bits in it , but it does n't work . they want the big cookie .
but if you offer kids two piles of laundry to fold , the small pile or the big pile , which will they choose ?
strangely , not the big pile . so , i think it 's as simple as this .
you know , when you want more , it 's because you want to enjoy it .
when you want less , it 's because it 's about work .
and so , to boil it all down , simplicity is about living life with more enjoyment and less pain .
i think this is sort of simple more versus less .
basically , it always depends .
this book i wrote because i want to figure out life .
i love life . i love being alive . i like to see things .
and so life is a big question , i think , in simplicity , because you 're trying to simplify your life .
and i just love to see the world . the world is an amazing place .
by being at ted , we see so many things at one time .
and i ca n't help but enjoy looking at everything in the world .
like everything you see , every time you wake up .
it 's such a joy to sort of experience everything in the world .
from everything from a weird hotel lobby , to saran wrap placed over your window , to this moment where i had my road in front of my house paved dark black , and this white moth was sitting there dying in the sun.
and so , this whole thing has struck me as exciting to be here , because life is finite .
this was given to me by the chairman of shiseido .
he 's an expert in aging . this horizontal axis is how old you are -- twelve years old , twenty - four years old , seventy - four , ninety - six years old -- and this is some medical data . so , brain strength increases up to 60 , and then after 60 , it sort of goes down . kind of depressing in a way .
also , if you look at your physical strength .
you know , i have a lot of cocky freshmen at mit , so i tell them , " oh , your bodies are really getting stronger and stronger , but in your late twenties and mid - thirties , cells , they die . "
ok . it gets them to work harder , sometimes .
and if you have your vision , vision is interesting .
as you age from infant age , your vision gets better , and maybe in your late teens , early twenties , you 're looking for a mate , and your vision goes after that .
your social responsibility is very interesting .
so , as you get older , you may , like , have kids , whatever .
and then the kids graduate , and you have no responsibility any more -- that 's very good , too .
but if any of you people ask , " what actually goes up ? does anything go up ?
what 's the positive part of this , you know ? " i think wisdom always goes up .
i love these eighty - year - old , ninety - year - old guys and women .
they have so many thoughts , and they have so much wisdom , and i think -- you know , this ted thing , i 've come here .
and this is the fourth time , and i come here for this wisdom , i think .
this whole ted effect , it sort of ups your wisdom , somehow .
and i 'm so glad to be here , and i 'm very grateful to be here , chris .
and this is an amazing experience for me as well .
