those of you who know me know how passionate i am about opening the space frontier .
so when i had the chance to give the world 's expert in gravity the experience of zero gravity , it was incredible .
and i want to tell you that story .
i first met him through the archon x prize for genomics .
it 's a competition we 're holding , the second x prize , for the first team to sequence 100 human genomes in 10 days .
we have something called the genome 100 -- 100 individuals we 're sequencing as part of that .
craig venter chairs that event .
and i met professor hawking , and he said his dream was to travel into space .
and i said , " i ca n't take you there , but i can take you into weightlessness into zero - g.
and he said , on the spot , " absolutely , yes . "
well , the only way to experience zero - g on earth is actually with parabolic flight , weightless flight .
you take an airplane , you fly over the top , you 're weightless for 25 seconds .
come back down , you weigh twice as much .
you do it again and again .
you can get eight , 10 minutes of weightlessness -- how nasa 's trained their astronauts for so long .
we set out to do this .
it took us 11 years to become operational .
and we announced that we were going to fly stephen hawking .
we had one government agency and one company aircraft operator say , you 're crazy , do n't do that , you 're going kill the guy .
and he wanted to go .
we worked hard to get all the permissions .
and six months later , we sat down at kennedy space center .
we had a press conference , we announced our intent to do one zero - g parabola , give him 25 seconds of zero - g.
and if it went really well , we might do three parabolas .
well , we asked him why he wanted to go up and do this .
and what he said , for me , was very moving .
he said , " life on earth is at an ever - increasing risk of being wiped out by disaster ...
i think the human race does n't have a future if it does n't go into space .
i therefore want to encourage public interest in space . "
we took him out to the kennedy space center , up inside the nasa vehicle , into the back of the zero - g airplane .
we had about 20 people who made donations -- we raised $ 150,000 in donations for children 's charities -- who flew with us .
a few tedsters here .
we set up a whole er .
we had four emergency room doctors and two nurses on board the airplane .
we were monitoring his po 2 of his blood , his heart rate , his blood pressure .
we had everything all set in case of an emergency ; god knows , you do n't want to hurt this world - renowned expert .
we took off from the shuttle landing facility , where the shuttle takes off and lands .
and my partner byron lichtenberg and i carefully suspended him into zero - g.
once he was there , [ we ] let him go to experience what weightlessness was truly like .
and after that first parabola , you know , the doc said everything is great . he was smiling , and we said go .
so we did a second parabola .
and a third .
we actually floated an apple in homage to sir isaac newton because professor hawking holds the same chair at cambridge that isaac newton did .
and we did a fourth , and a fifth and a sixth .
and a seventh and an eighth .
and this man does not look like a 65 - year - old wheelchair - bound man .
he was so happy .
we are living on a precious jewel , and it 's during our lifetime that we 're moving off this planet .
please join us in this epic adventure .
thank you so much .
