the advances that have taken place in astronomy , cosmology and biology , in the last 10 years , are really extraordinary -- to the point where we know more about our universe and how it works than many of you might imagine .
but there was something else that i 've noticed as those changes were taking place , as people were starting to find out that hmm ... yeah , there really is a black hole at the center of every galaxy .
the science writers and editors -- i should n't say science writers , i should say people who write about science -- and editors would sit down over a couple of beers , after a hard day of work , and start talking about some of these incredible perceptions about how the universe works .
and they would inevitably end up in what i thought was a very bizarre place , which is ways the world could end very suddenly .
and that 's what i want to talk about today .
ah , you laugh , you fools .
yeah , we need the time !
stephen petranek : at first , it all seemed a little fantastical to me , but after challenging a lot of these ideas , i began to take a lot of them seriously . and then september 11 happened , and i thought , ah , god , i ca n't go to the ted conference and talk about how the world is going to end .
nobody wants to hear that . not after this !
and that got me into a discussion with some other people , other scientists , about maybe some other subjects , and one of the guys i talked to , who was a neuroscientist , said , " you know , i think there are a lot of solutions to the problems you brought up , " and reminds me of michael 's talk yesterday and his mother saying you ca n't have a solution if you do n't have a problem .
so , we went out looking for solutions to ways that the world might end tomorrow , and lo and behold , we found them .
which leads me to a videotape of a president bush press conference from a couple of weeks ago .
can we run that , andrew ?
president george w. bush : whatever it costs to defend our security , and whatever it costs to defend our freedom , we must pay it .
sp : i agree with the president .
he wants two trillion dollars to protect us from terrorists next year , a two - trillion - dollar federal budget , which will land us back into deficit spending real fast . but terrorists are n't the only threat we face .
there are really serious calamities staring us in the eye that we 're in the same kind of denial about that we were about terrorism , and what could 've happened on september 11 .
i would propose , therefore , that if we took 10 billion dollars from that 2.13 trillion dollar budget -- which is two one hundredths of that budget -- and we doled out a billion dollars to each one of these problems i 'm going to talk to you about , the vast majority could be solved , and the rest we could deal with . so , i hope you find this both fascinating -- i 'm fascinated by this kind of stuff , i gotta admit -- to me these are richard 's cockroaches .
but i also hope , because i think the people in this room can literally change the world , i hope you take some of this stuff away with you , and when you have an opportunity to be influential , that you try to get some heavy - duty money spent on some of these ideas .
so let 's start . number 10 : we lose the will to survive .
we live in an incredible age of modern medicine . we are all much healthier than we were 20 years ago .
people around the world are getting better medicine -- but mentally , we 're falling apart .
the world health organization now estimates that one out of five people on the planet is clinically depressed .
and the world health organization also says that depression is the biggest epidemic that humankind has ever faced .
soon , genetic breakthroughs and even better medicine are going to allow us to think of 100 as a normal lifespan .
a female child born tomorrow , on average -- median -- will live to age 83 .
our life longevity is going up almost a year for every year that passes .
now the problem with all of this , getting older , is that people over 65 are the most likely people to commit suicide .
so , what are the solutions ?
we do n't really have mental health insurance in this country , and it 's -- -- it 's really a crime .
something like 98 percent of all people with depression , and i mean really severe depression -- i have a friend with stunningly severe depression -- this is a curable disease , with present medicine and present technology .
but it is often a combination of talk therapy and pills .
pills alone do n't do it , especially in clinically depressed people .
you ought to be able to go to a psychiatrist or a psychologist , and put down your 10 - dollar copay , and get treated , just like you do when you got a cut on your arm . it 's ridiculous .
secondly , drug companies are not going to develop really sophisticated psychoactive drugs . we know that most mental illnesses have a biological component that can be dealt with .
and we know just an amazing amount more about the brain now than we did 10 years ago . we need a pump - push from the federal government , through nih and national science -- nsf -- and places like that to start helping the drug companies develop some advanced psychoactive drugs .
moving on . number nine -- do n't laugh -- aliens invade earth .
ten years ago , you could n't have found an astronomer -- well , very few astronomers -- in the world who would 've told you that there are any planets anywhere outside our solar system .
1995 , we found three . the count now is up to 80 --
we 're finding about two or three a month .
all of the ones we 've found , by the way , are in this little , teeny , tiny corner where we live , in the milky way . there must be millions of planets in the milky way , and as carl sagan insisted for many years , and was laughed at for it , there must be billions and billions in the universe .
in a few years , nasa is going to launch four or five telescopes out to jupiter , where there 's less dust , and start looking for earth - like planets , which we cannot see with present technology , nor detect .
it 's becoming obvious that the chance that life does not exist elsewhere in the universe , and probably fairly close to us , is a fairly remote idea .
and the chance that some of it is n't more intelligent than ours is also a remote idea .
remember , we 've only been an advanced civilization -- an industrial civilization , if you would -- for 200 years . although every time i go to pompeii , i 'm amazed that they had the equivalent of a mcdonald 's on every street corner , too .
so , i do n't know how much civilization really has progressed since ad 79 , but there 's a great likelihood . i really believe this , and i do n't believe in aliens , and i do n't believe there are any aliens on the earth or anything like that . but there 's a likelihood that we will confront a civilization that is more intelligent than our own .
now , what will happen ? what if they come to , you know , suck up our oceans for the hydrogen ?
and swat us away like flies , the way we swat away flies when we go into the rainforest and start logging it .
we can look at our own history . the late physicist gerard o'neill said , " advanced western civilization has had a destructive effect on all primitive civilizations it has come in contact with , even in those cases where every attempt was made to protect and guard the primitive civilization . "
if the aliens come visiting , we 're the primitive civilization .
so , what are the solutions to this ?
thank god you can all read !
it may seem ridiculous , but we have a really lousy history of anticipating things like this and actually being prepared for them .
how much energy and money does it take to actually have a plan to negotiate with an advanced species ?
secondly -- and you 're going to hear more from me about this -- we have to become an outward - looking , space - faring nation .
we have got to develop the idea that the earth does n't last forever , our sun does n't last forever . if we want humanity to last forever , we have to colonize the milky way .
and that is not something that is beyond comprehension at this point .
it 'll also help us a lot , if we meet an advanced civilization along the way , if we 're trying to be an advanced civilization . number eight --
sp : you 've got it ! you 've got the job .
number eight : the ecosystem collapses .
last july , in science , the journal science , 19 oceanographers published a very , very unusual article . it was n't really a research report ; it was a screed .
they said , we 've been looking at the oceans for a long time now , and we want to tell you they 're not in trouble , they 're near collapse .
many other ecosystems on earth are in real , real danger .
we 're living in a time of mass extinctions that exceeds the fossil record by a factor of 10,000 .
we have lost 25 percent of the unique species in hawaii in the last 20 years . california is expected to lose 25 percent of its species in the next 40 years .
somewhere in the amazon forest is the marginal tree .
you cut down that tree , the rain forest collapses as an ecosystem .
there 's really a tree like that out there . that 's really what it comes to .
and when that ecosystem collapses , it could take a major ecosystem with it , like our atmosphere . so , what do we do about this ? what are the solutions ?
there is some modeling of ecosystems going on now .
the problem with ecosystems is that we understand them so poorly , that we do n't know they 're really in trouble until it 's almost too late .
we need to know earlier that they 're getting in trouble , and we need to be able to pump possible solutions into models .
and with the kind of computing power we have now , there is , as i say , some of this going on , but it needs money .
national science foundation needs to say -- you know , almost all the money that 's spent on science in this country comes from the federal government , one way or another .
and they get to prioritize , you know ?
there are people at the national science foundation who get to say , this is the most important thing .
this is one of the things they ought to be thinking more about .
secondly , we need to create huge biodiversity reserves on the planet , and start moving them around .
there 's been an experiment for the last four or five years on the georges bank , or the grand banks off of newfoundland . it 's a no - take fishing zone .
they ca n't fish there for a radius of 200 miles .
and an amazing thing has happened : almost all the fish have come back , and they 're reproducing like crazy . we 're going to have to start doing this around the globe . we 're going to have to have no - take zones .
we 're going to have to say , no more logging in the amazon for 20 years .
let it recover , before we start logging again .
number seven : particle accelerator mishap .
you all remember ted kaczynski , the unabomber ?
one of the things he raved about was that a particle accelerator experiment could go haywire and set off a chain reaction that would destroy the world .
a lot of very sober - minded physicists , believe it or not , have had exactly the same thought .
this spring -- there 's a collider at brookhaven , on long island -- this spring , it 's going to have an experiment in which it creates black holes .
they are expecting to create little , tiny black holes .
they expect them to evaporate .
i hope they 're right .
other collider experiments -- there 's one that 's going to take place next summer at cern -- have the possibility of creating something called strangelets , which are kind of like antimatter . whenever they hit other matter , they destroy it and obliterate it . most physicists say that the accelerators we have now are not really powerful enough to create black holes and strangelets that we need to worry about , and they 're probably right .
but , all around the world , in japan , in canada , there 's talk about this , of reviving this in the united states .
we shut one down that was going to be big .
but there 's talk of building very big accelerators .
what can we do about this ? what are the solutions ?
we 've got the fox watching the henhouse here .
we need to -- we need the advice of particle physicists to talk about particle physics and what should be done in particle physics , but we need some outside thinking and watchdogging of what 's going on with these experiments .
secondly , we have a natural laboratory surrounding the earth .
we have an electromagnetic field around the earth , and it 's constantly bombarded by high - energy particles , like protons .
and in my opinion , we do n't spend enough time looking at that natural laboratory and figuring out first what 's safe to do on earth .
number six : biotech disaster . it 's one of my favorite ones , because we 've done several stories on bt corn .
bt corn is a corn that creates its own pesticide to kill a corn borer .
you may of heard of it -- heard it called starlink , especially when all those taco shells were taken out of the supermarkets about a year and a half ago .
this stuff was supposed to only be feed for animals in the united states , and it got into the human food supply , and somebody should 've figured out that it would get in the human food supply very easily .
but the thing that 's alarming is a couple of months ago , in mexico , where bt corn and all genetically altered corn is totally illegal , they found bt corn genes in wild corn plants .
now , corn originated , we think , in mexico .
this is the genetic biodiversity storehouse of corn .
this brings back a skepticism that has gone away recently , that superweeds and superpests could spread around the world , from biotechnology , that literally could destroy the world 's food supply in very short order .
so , what do we do about that ?
we treat biotechnology with the same scrutiny we apply to nuclear power plants .
it 's that simple . this is an amazingly unregulated field .
when the starlink disaster happened , there was a battle between the epa and the fda over who really had authority , and over what parts of this , and they did n't get it straightened out for months . that 's kind of crazy .
number five , one of my favorites : reversal of the earth 's magnetic field .
believe it or not , this happens every few hundred thousand years , and has happened many times in our history . north pole goes to the south , south pole goes to the north , and vice versa .
but what happens , as this occurs , is that we lose our magnetic field around the earth over the period of about 100 years , and that means that all these cosmic rays and particles that are to come streaming at us from the sun , that this field protects us from , are -- well , basically , we 're gonna fry .
sp : so , what can we do about this ? oh , by the way , we 're overdue . it 's been 780,000 years since this happened .
so , it should have happened about 480,000 years ago .
oh , and here 's one other thing . scientists think now our magnetic field may be diminished by about five percent . so , maybe we 're in the throes of it .
one of the problems of trying to figure out how healthy the earth is , is that we have -- you know , we do n't have good weather data from 60 years ago , much less data on things like the ozone layer .
so , there 's a fairly simple solution to this .
there 's going to be a lot of cheap rocketry that 's going to come online in about six or seven years that gets us into the low atmosphere very cheaply .
you know , we can make ozone from car tailpipes .
it 's not hard : it 's just three oxygen atoms .
if you brought the entire ozone layer down to the surface of the earth , it would be the thickness of two pennies , at 14 pounds per square inch .
you do n't need that much up there .
we need to learn how to repair and replenish the earth 's ozone layer .
number four : giant solar flares .
solar flares are enormous magnetic outbursts from the sun that bombard the earth with high - speed subatomic particles .
so far , our atmosphere has done , and our magnetic field has done pretty well protecting us from this .
occasionally , we get a flare from the sun that causes havoc with communications and so forth , and electricity .
but the alarming thing is that astronomers recently have been studying stars that are similar to our sun , and they 've found that a number of them , when they 're about the age of our sun , brighten by a factor of as much as 20. does n't last for very long .
and they think these are super - flares , millions of times more powerful than any flares we 've had from our sun so far .
obviously , we do n't want one of those .
there 's a flip side to it . in studying stars like our sun , we 've found that they go through periods of diminishment , when their total amount of energy that 's expelled from them goes down by maybe one percent .
one percent does n't sound like a lot , but it would cause one hell of an ice age here .
so , what can we do about this ?
start terraforming mars . this is one of my favorite subjects . i wrote a story about this in life magazine in 1993 .
this is rocket science , but it 's not hard rocket science .
everything that we need to make an atmosphere on mars , and to make a livable planet on mars , is probably there .
and you just , literally , have to send little nuclear factories up there that gobble up the iron oxide on the surface of mars and spit out the oxygen .
the problem is it takes 300 years to terraform mars , minimum .
really more like 500 years to do it right .
there 's no reason why we should n't start now .
number three -- is n't this stuff cool ?
a new global epidemic . people have been at war with germs and from time to time , the germs sure get the upper hand .
in 1918 , we had a flu epidemic in the united states that killed 20 million people .
that was back when the population was around 100 million people .
the bubonic plague in europe , in the middle ages , killed one out of four europeans .
aids is coming back . ebola seems to be rearing its head with much too much frequency , and old diseases like cholera are becoming resistant to antibiotics .
we 've all learned what -- the kind of panic that can occur when an old disease rears its head , like anthrax .
the worst possibility is that a very simple germ , like staph , for which we have one antibiotic that still works , mutates .
and we know staph can do amazing things .
a staph cell can be next to a muscle cell in your body and borrow genes from it when antibiotics come , and change and mutate .
the danger is that some germ like staph will be -- will mutate into something that 's really virulent , very contagious , and will sweep through populations before we can do anything about it .
that 's happened before . about 12,000 years ago , there was a massive wave of mammal extinctions in the americas , and that is thought to have been a virulent disease .
so , what can we do about it ?
it is nuts . we give antibiotics -- -- every cow , every lamb , every chicken , they get antibiotics every day , all . you know , you go to a restaurant , you eat fish , i got news for you , it 's all farmed . you know , you gotta ask when you go to a restaurant if it 's a wild fish , cause they 're not going to tell you . we 're giving away the code . this is like being at war and giving somebody your secret code .
we 're telling the germs out there how to fight us .
we gotta fix that . we gotta outlaw that right away .
secondly , our public health system , as we saw with anthrax , is a real disaster .
we have a real , major outbreak of disease in the united states , we are not prepared to cope with it .
now , there is money in the federal budget , next year , to build up the public health service .
but i do n't think to any extent that it really needs to be done .
number two -- my favorite -- we meet a rogue black hole .
you know , 10 years ago , or 15 years ago , really , you walk into an astronomy convention , and you say , " you know , there 's probably a black hole at the center of every galaxy , "
and they 're going to hoot you off the stage .
and now , if you went into one of those conventions and you said , " well , i do n't think black holes are out there , " they 'd hoot you off the stage .
our comprehension of the way the universe works is really -- has just gained unbelievably in recent years .
we think that there are about 10 million dead stars in the milky way alone , our galaxy .
and these stars have compressed down to maybe something like 12 , 15 miles wide , and they are black holes . and they are gobbling up everything around them , including light , which is why we ca n't see them .
most of them should be in orbit around something .
but galaxies are very violent places , and things can be spun out of orbit .
and also , space is incredibly vast .
so even if you flung a million of these things out of orbit , the chances that one would actually hit us is fairly remote .
but it only has to get close , about a billion miles away , one of these things .
about a billion miles away , here 's what happens to earth 's orbit : it becomes elliptical instead of circular .
and for three months out of the year , the surface temperatures go up to 150 to _UNK_ for three months out of the year , they go to 50 below zero .
that wo n't work too well . what can we do about this ?
and this is my scariest . i do n't have a good answer for this one .
again , we gotta think about being a colonizing race .
and finally , number one : biggest danger to life as we know it , i think , a really big asteroid heads for earth .
the important thing to remember here -- this is not a question of if , this is a question of when , and how big .
in 1908 , just a 200 - foot piece of a comet exploded over siberia and flattened forests for maybe 100 miles .
it had the effect of about 1,000 hiroshima bombs .
astronomers estimate that little asteroids like that come about every hundred years .
in 1989 , a large asteroid passed 400,000 miles away from earth .
nothing to worry about , right ?
it passed directly through earth 's orbit . we were in that that spot six hours earlier .
a small asteroid , say a half mile wide , would touch off firestorms followed by severe global cooling from the debris kicked up -- carl sagan 's nuclear winter thing . an asteroid five miles wide causes major extinctions . we think the one that got the dinosaurs was about five miles wide .
where are they ? there 's something called the kuiper belt , which -- some people think pluto 's not a planet , that 's where pluto is , it 's in the kuiper belt .
there 's also something a little farther out , called the oort cloud .
there are about 100,000 balls of ice and rock -- comets , really -- out there , that are 50 miles in diameter or more , and they regularly take a little spin , in towards the sun and pass reasonably close to us .
of more concern , i think , is the asteroids that exist between mars and jupiter .
the folks at the sloan digital sky survey told us last fall -- they 're making the first map of the universe , three - dimensional map of the universe -- that there are probably 700,000 asteroids between mars and jupiter that are a half a mile big or bigger .
so you say , yeah , well , what are really the chances of this happening ?
andrew , can you put that chart up ?
this is a chart that dr. clark chapman at the southwest research institute presented to congress a few years ago .
you 'll notice that the chance of an asteroid - slash - comet impact killing you is about one in 20,000 , according to the work they 've done .
now look at the one right below that .
passenger aircraft crash , one in 20,000 .
we spend an awful lot of money trying to be sure that we do n't die in airplane accidents , and we 're not spending hardly anything on this . and yet , this is completely preventable .
we finally have , just in the last year , the technology to stop this cold .
could we have the solutions ?
nasa 's spending three million dollars a year , three million bucks -- that is like pocket change -- to search for asteroids .
because we can actually figure out every asteroid that 's out there , and if it might hit earth , and when it might hit earth .
and they 're trying to do that .
but it 's going to take them 10 years , at spending three million dollars a year , and even then , they claim they 'll only have about 80 percent of them catalogued .
comets are a tougher act .
we do n't really have the technology to predict comet trajectories , or when one with our name on it might arrive .
but we would have lots of time , if we see it coming .
we really need a dedicated observatory .
you 'll notice that a lot of comets are named after people you never heard of , amateur astronomers ? that 's because nobody 's looking for them , except amateurs .
we need a dedicated observatory that looks for comets .
part two of the solutions : we need to figure out how to blow up an asteroid , or alter its trajectory . now , a year ago , we did an amazing thing .
we sent a probe out to this asteroid belt , called near , near earth asteroid rendezvous .
and these guys orbited a 30 -- or no , about a 22 - mile long asteroid called eros .
and then , of course , you know , they pulled one of those sneaky nasa things , where they had extra batteries and extra gas aboard and everything , and then , at the last minute , they landed . when the mission was over , they actually landed on the thing .
we have landed a rocket ship on an asteroid . it 's not a big deal .
now , the trouble with just sending a bomb out for this thing is that you do n't have anything to push against in space , because there 's no air .
a nuclear explosion is just as hot , but we do n't really have anything big enough to melt a 22 - mile long asteroid ,
or vaporize it , would be more like it .
but we can learn to land on these asteroids that have our name on them and put something like a small ion propulsion motor on it , which would gently , slowly , after a period of time , push it into a different trajectory , which , if we 've done our math right , would keep it from hitting earth .
this is just a matter of finding ' em , going there , and doing something about it .
i know your head is spinning from all this stuff .
yikes ! so many big threats !
the thing , i think , to remember , is september 11 .
we do n't want to get caught flat - footed again .
we know about this stuff .
science has the power to predict the future in many cases now .
knowledge is power .
the worst thing we can do is say , jeez , i got enough to worry about without worrying about an asteroid .
that 's a mistake that could literally cost us our future .
thank you .
