this is your conference , and i think you have a right to know a little bit right now , in this transition period , about this guy who 's going to be looking after it for you for a bit .
so , i 'm just going to grab a chair here .
two years ago at ted , i think -- i 've come to this conclusion -- i think i may have been suffering from a strange delusion .
i think that i may have believed unconsciously , then , that i was kind of a business hero .
i had this company that i 'd spent 15 years building . it 's called future ;
it was a magazine publishing company .
it had recently gone public and the market said that it was apparently worth two billion dollars , a number i did n't really understand .
a magazine i 'd recently launched called business 2.0 was fatter than a telephone directory , busy pumping hot air into the bubble . and i was the 40 percent owner of a dotcom that was about to go public and no doubt be worth billions more .
and all this had come from nothing .
fifteen years earlier , i was a science journalist who people just laughed at when i said , " i really would like to start my own computer magazine . "
and 15 years later , there are 100 of them
and 2,000 people on staff and it was just such heady times .
the date was february 2000 .
i thought the little graph of my business life that kind of looked a bit like moore 's law -- i mean , it had to . right ? i was in for quite a surprise .
the dotcom , ironically called snowball , was the very last consumer web company to go public the next month before nasdaq exploded , and i entered 18 months of business hell .
i watched everything that i 'd built crumbling ,
and it looked like all this stuff was going to die and 15 years work would have come for nothing .
and it was gut wrenching .
it took eight years of blood , sweat and tears to reach 350 employees , something which i was very proud of in the business .
february 2001 -- in one day we laid off 350 people , and before the bloodshed was finished , 1,000 people had lost their jobs from my companies . i felt sick .
i watched my own net worth falling by about a million dollars a day , every day , for 18 months .
and worse than that , far worse than that , my sense of self - worth was kind of evaporating .
i was going around with this big sign on my forehead : " loser . "
and i think what disgusts me more than anything , looking back , is how the hell did i let my personal happiness get so tied up with this business thing ?
well , in the end , we were able to save future and snowball , but i was , at that point , ready to move on . and to cut a long story short , here 's where i came to .
and the reason i 'm telling this story is that i believe , from many conversations , that a lot of people in this room have been through a similar kind of rollercoaster -- emotional rollercoaster -- in the last couple years .
this has been a big , big transition time , and i believe that this conference can play a big part for all of us in taking us forward to the next stage to whatever 's next .
the theme next year is re - birth .
it was at the same ted two years ago when richard and i reached an agreement on the future of ted .
and at about the same time , and i think partly because of that , i started doing something that i 'd forgotten about in my business focus :
i started to read again .
and i discovered that while i 'd been busy playing business games , there 'd been this incredible revolution in so many areas of interest : cosmology to psychology to evolutionary psychology to anthropology to ... all this stuff had changed .
and the way in which you could think about us as a species and us as a planet had just changed so much , and it was incredibly exciting .
and what was really most exciting -- and i think richard wurman discovered this at least 20 years before i did -- was that all this stuff is connected .
it 's connected ; it all hooks into each other .
we talk about this a lot , and i thought about trying to give an example of this . so , just one example :
madame de gaulle , the wife of the french president , was famously asked once , " what do you most desire ? "
and she answered , " a penis . "
and when you think about it , it 's very true :
what we all most desire is a penis --
or " happiness " as we say in english .
and something ... good luck with that one in the japanese translation room .
but something as basic as happiness , which 20 years ago would have been just something for discussion in the church or mosque or synagogue , today it turns out that there 's dozens of ted - like questions that you can ask about it , which are really interesting .
you can ask about what causes it biochemically : neuroscience , serotonin , all that stuff .
you can ask what are the psychological causes of it :
nature ? nurture ? current circumstance ?
turns out that the research done on that is absolutely mind - blowing .
you can view it as a computing problem , an artificial intelligence problem :
do you need to incorporate some sort of analog of happiness into a computer brain to make it work properly ?
you can view it in sort of geopolitical terms and say , why is it that a billion people on this planet are so desperately needy that they have no possibility of happiness , and whereas almost all the rest of them , regardless of how much money they have -- whether it 's two dollars a day or whatever -- are almost equally happy on average ?
or you can view it as an evolutionary psychology kind of thing :
did our genes invent this as a kind of trick to get us to behave in certain ways ? the ant 's brain , parasitized , to make us behave in certain ways so that our genes would propagate ?
are we the victims of a mass delusion ?
and so on , and so on .
to understand even something as important to us as happiness , you kind of have to branch off in all these different directions , and there 's nowhere that i 've discovered -- other than ted -- where you can ask that many questions in that many different directions .
and so , it 's the profound thing that richard talks about : to understand anything , you just need to understand the little bits ;
a little bit about everything that surrounds it .
and so , gradually over these three days , you start off kind of trying to figure out , " why am i listening to all this irrelevant stuff ? "
and at the end of the four days , your brain is humming and you feel energized , alive and excited , and it 's because all these different bits have been put together .
it 's the total brain experience , we 're going to ... it 's the mental equivalent of the full body massage .
every mental organ addressed . it really is .
enough of the theory , chris . tell us what you 're actually going to do , all right ?
so , i will . here 's the vision for ted .
number one : do nothing . this thing ai n't broke , so i ai n't gonna fix it .
jeff bezos kindly remarked to me , " chris , ted is a really great conference .
you 're going to have to fuck up really badly to make it bad . "
so , i gave myself the job title of ted custodian for a reason , and i will promise you right here and now that the core values that make ted special are not going to be interfered with .
truth , curiosity , diversity , no selling , no corporate bullshit , no bandwagoning , no platforms .
just the pursuit of interest , wherever it lies , across all the disciplines that are represented here .
that 's not going to be changed at all .
number two : i am going to put together an incredible line up of speakers for next year .
the time scale on which ted operates is just fantastic after coming out of a magazine business with monthly deadlines .
there 's a year to do this , and already -- i hope to show you a bit later -- there 's 25 or so terrific speakers signed up for next year .
and i 'm getting fantastic help from the community ; this is just such a great community . and combined , our contacts reach pretty much everyone who 's interesting in the country , if not the planet .
it 's true .
number three : i do want to , if i can , find a way of extending the ted experience throughout the year a little bit .
and one key way that we 're going to do this is to introduce this book club .
books kind of saved me in the last couple years , and that 's a gift that i would like to pass on . so , when you sign up for ted 2003 , every six weeks you 'll get a care package with a book or two and a reason why they 're linked to ted .
they may well be by a ted speaker , and so we can get the conversation going during the year and come back next year having had the same intellectual , emotional journey .
i think it will be great .
and then , fourthly : i want to mention the sapling foundation , which is the new owner of ted .
what sapling 's ownership means is that all of the proceeds of ted will go towards the causes that sapling stands for .
and more important , i think , the ideas that are exhibited and realized here are ideas that the foundation can use , because there 's fantastic synergy .
already , just in the last few days , we 've had so many people talking about stuff that they care about , that they 're passionate about , that can make a difference in the world , and the idea of getting this group of people together -- some of the causes that we believe in , the money that this conference can raise and the ideas -- i really believe that that combination will , over time , make a difference .
i 'm incredibly excited about that .
in fact , i do n't think , overall , that i 've been as excited by anything ever in my life .
i 'm in this for the long run , and i would be greatly honored and excited if you 'll come on this journey with me .
