i 'm standing in front of you today in all humility , wanting to share with you my journey of the last six years in the field of service and education .
and i 'm not a trained academic . neither am i a veteran social worker .
i was 26 years in the corporate world , trying to make organizations profitable .
and then in 2003 i started parikrma humanity foundation from my kitchen table .
the first thing that we did was walk through the slums .
you know , by the way , there are two million people in bangalore , who live in 800 slums .
we could n't go to all the slums , but we tried to cover as much as we could .
we walked through these slums , identified houses where children would never go to school .
we talked to the parents , tried to convince them about sending their children to school .
we played with the children , and came back home really tired , exhausted , but with images of bright faces , twinkling eyes , and went to sleep .
we were all excited to start , but the numbers hit us then :
200 million children between four to 14 that should be going to school , but do not ;
100 million children who go to school but cannot read ; 125 million who cannot do basic maths .
we also heard that 250 billion indian rupees was dedicated for government schooling . ninety percent of it was spent on teachers ' salary and administrators ' salary .
and yet , india has nearly the highest teacher absenteeism in the world , with one out of four teachers not going to school at all the entire academic year .
those numbers were absolutely mind - boggling , overwhelming , and we were constantly asked , " when will you start ? how many schools will you start ?
how many children will you get ?
how are you going to scale ?
how are you going to replicate ? "
it was very difficult not to get scared , not to get daunted . but we dug our heels and said , " we 're not in the number game .
we want to take one child at a time and take the child right through school , sent to college , and get them prepared for better living , a high value job . "
so , we started parikrma .
the first parikrma school started in a slum where there were 70,000 people living below the poverty line .
our first school was on a rooftop of a building inside the slums , a second story building , the only second story building inside the slums .
and that rooftop did not have any ceiling , only half a tin sheet .
that was our first school . one hundred sixty - five children .
indian academic year begins in june .
so , june it rains , so many a times all of us would be huddled under the tin roof , waiting for the rain to stop .
my god ! what a bonding exercise that was .
and all of us that were under that roof are still here together today .
then came the second school , the third school , the fourth school and a junior college .
in six years now , we have four schools , one junior college ,
1,100 children coming from 28 slums and four orphanages .
our dream is very simple : to send each of these kids , get them prepared to be educated but also to live peacefully , contented in this conflict - ridden
chaotic globalized world .
now , when you talk global you have to talk english . and so all our schools are english medium schools .
but they know there is this myth that children from the slums cannot speak english well .
no one in their family has spoken english .
no one in their generation has spoken english .
but how wrong it is .
girl : i like adventurous books , and some of my favorites are alfred hitchcock and [ unclear ] and hardy boys .
although they are like in different contexts , one is magical , the other two are like investigation , i like those books because they have something special in them . the vocabulary used in those books and the style of writing .
i mean like once i pick up one book i cannot put it down until i finish the whole book .
even if it takes me four and a half hours , or three and half hours to finish my book , i do it .
boy : i did good research and i got the information [ on the ] world 's fastest cars .
i like ducati zz 143 , because it is the fastest , the world 's fastest bike ,
and i like pulsar 220 dtsi because it is india 's fastest bike .
shukla bose : well , that girl that you saw , her father sells flowers on the roadside .
and this little boy has been coming to school for five years .
but is n't it strange that little boys all over the world love fast bikes ?
he has n't seen one , he has n't ridden one , of course , but he has done a lot of research through google search .
you know , when we started with our english medium schools we also decided to adopt the best curriculum possible , the icse curriculum .
and again , there were people who laughed at me and said , " do n't be crazy choosing such a tough curriculum for these students .
they 'll never be able to cope . "
not only do our children cope very well , but they excel in it .
you should just come across to see how well our children do .
there is also this myth that parents from the slums are not interested in their children going to school ; they 'd much rather put them to work .
that 's absolute hogwash .
all parents all over the world want their children to lead a better life than themselves ,
but they need to believe that change is possible .
video : sb : we have 80 percent attendance for all our parents - teachers meeting .
sometimes it 's even 100 percent , much more than many privileged schools .
fathers have started to attend .
it 's very interesting . when we started our school the parents would give thumbprints in the attendance register .
now they have started writing their signature .
the children have taught them .
it 's amazing how much children can teach .
we have , a few months ago , actually late last year , we had a few mothers who came to us and said , " you know , we want to learn how to read and write .
can you teach us ? " so , we started an afterschool for our parents , for our mothers .
we had 25 mothers who came regularly after school to study .
we want to continue with this program and extend it to all our other schools .
ninety - eight percent of our fathers are alcoholics .
so , you can imagine how traumatized and how dysfunctional the houses are where our children come from .
we have to send the fathers to de - addiction labs and when they come back , most times sober , we have to find a job for them so that they do n't regress .
we have about three fathers who have been trained to cook .
we have taught them nutrition , hygiene .
we have helped them set up the kitchen and now they are supplying food to all our children .
they do a very good job because their children are eating their food , but most importantly this is the first time they have got respect , and they feel that they are doing something worthwhile .
more than 90 percent of our non - teaching staff are all parents and extended families .
we 've started many programs just to make sure that the child comes to school .
vocational skill program for the older siblings so the younger ones are not stopped from coming to school .
there is also this myth that children from the slums cannot integrate with mainstream .
take a look at this little girl who was one of the 28 children from all privileged schools , best schools in the country that was selected for the duke university talent identification program and was sent to iim ahmedabad .
video : girl : duke iima camp . whenever we see that iima , it was such a pride for us to go to that camp .
everybody was very friendly , especially i got a lot of friends . and i felt that my english has improved a lot going there and chatting with friends .
there they met children who are with a different standard and a different mindset , a totally different society .
i mingled with almost everyone .
they were very friendly .
i had very good friends there , who are from delhi , who are from mumbai .
even now we are in touch through facebook .
after this ahmedabad trip i 've been like a totally different mingling with people and all of those .
before that i feel like i was n't like this .
i do n't even mingle , or start speaking with someone so quickly .
my accent with english improved a lot . and i learned football , volleyball , frisbee , lots of games .
and i would n't want to go to bangalore . let me stay here .
such beautiful food ,
i enjoyed it . it was so beautiful .
i enjoyed eating food like [ unclear ] would come and ask me , " yes ma'am , what you want ? " it was so good to hear !
sb : this girl was working as a maid before she came to school .
and today she wants to be a neurologist .
our children are doing brilliantly in sports .
they are really excelling .
there is an inter - school athletic competition that is held every year in bangalore , where 5,000 children participate from 140 best schools in the city .
we 've got the best school award for three years successively . and our children are coming back home with bags full of medals , with lots of admirers and friends .
last year there were a couple of kids from elite schools that came to ask for admissions in our school .
we also have our very own dream team .
why is this happening ? why this confidence ?
is it the exposure ? we have professors from mit , berkeley , stanford , indian institute of science who come and teach our children lots of scientific formulas , experiments , much beyond the classroom .
art , music are considered therapy and mediums of expression .
we also believe that it 's the content that is more important .
it is not the infrastructure , not the toilets , not the libraries , but it is what actually happens in this school that is more important .
creating an environment of learning , of inquiry , of exploration is what is true education .
when we started parikrma we had no idea which direction we were taking .
we did n't hire mckinsey to do a business plan .
but we know for sure that what we want to do today is take one child at a time , not get bogged with numbers , and actually see the child complete the circle of life , and unleash his total potential .
we do not believe in scale because we believe in quality , and scale and numbers will automatically happen .
we have corporates that have stood behind us , and we are able to , now , open more schools .
but we began with the idea of one child at a time .
this is five - year - old parusharam .
he was begging by a bus stop a few years ago , got picked up and is now in an orphanage , has been coming to school for the last four and a half months .
he 's in kindergarten .
he has learned how to speak english .
we have a model by which kids can speak english and understand english in three month 's time .
he can tell you stories in english of the thirsty crow , of the crocodile and of the giraffe .
and if you ask him what he likes to do he will say , " i like sleeping .
i like eating . i like playing . "
and if you ask him what he wants to do , he will say , " i want to horsing . "
now , " horsing " is going for a horse ride .
so , parusharam comes to my office every day .
he comes for a tummy rub , because he believes that will give me luck . when i started parikrma i began with a great deal of arrogance of transforming the world .
but today i have been transformed .
i have been changed with my children .
i 've learned so much from them : love , compassion , imagination and such creativity .
parusharam is parikrma
with a simple beginning but a long way to go .
i promise you , parusharam will speak in the ted conference a few years from now .
thank you .
