this strange - looking plant is called the llareta .
what looks like moss covering rocks is actually a shrub comprised of thousands of branches , each containing clusters of tiny green leaves at the end and so densely packed together that you could actually stand on top of it .
this individual lives in the atacama desert in chile , and it happens to be 3,000 years old .
it also happens to be a relative of parsley .
for the past five years , i 've been researching , working with biologists and traveling all over the world to find continuously living organisms that are 2,000 years old and older .
the project is part art and part science .
there 's an environmental component .
and i 'm also trying to create a means in which to step outside our quotidian experience of time and to start to consider a deeper timescale .
i selected 2,000 years as my minimum age because i wanted to start at what we consider to be year zero and work backward from there .
what you 're looking at now is a tree called jomon sugi , living on the remote island of yakushima .
the tree was in part a catalyst for the project .
i 'd been traveling in japan without an agenda other than to photograph , and then i heard about this tree that is 2,180 years old and knew that i had to go visit it .
it was n't until later , when i was actually back home in new york that i got the idea for the project .
so it was the slow churn , if you will .
i think it was my longstanding desire to bring together my interest in art , science and philosophy that allowed me to be ready when the proverbial light bulb went on .
so i started researching , and to my surprise , this project had never been done before in the arts or the sciences .
and -- perhaps naively -- i was surprised to find that there is n't even an area in the sciences that deals with this idea of global species longevity .
so what you 're looking at here is the rhizocarpon geographicum , or map lichen , and this is around 3,000 years old and lives in greenland , which is a long way to go for some lichens .
visiting greenland was more like traveling back in time than just traveling very far north .
it was very primal and more remote than anything i 'd ever experienced before .
and this is heightened by a couple of particular experiences .
one was when i had been dropped off by boat on a remote fjord , only to find that the archeologists i was supposed to meet were nowhere to be found .
and it 's not like you could send them a text or shoot them an e-mail , so i was literally left to my own devices .
but luckily , it worked out obviously ,
but it was a humbling experience to feel so disconnected .
and then a few days later , we had the opportunity to go fishing in a glacial stream near our campsite , where the fish were so abundant that you could literally reach into the stream and grab out a foot - long trout with your bare hands .
it was like visiting a more innocent time on the planet .
and then , of course , there 's the lichens .
these lichens grow only one centimeter every hundred years .
i think that really puts human lifespans into a different perspective .
and what you 're looking at here is an aerial photo take over eastern oregon .
and if the title " searching for armillaria death rings , " sounds ominous , it is .
the armillaria is actually a predatory fungus , killing certain species of trees in the forest .
it 's also more benignly known as the honey mushroom or the " humongous fungus " because it happens to be one of the world 's largest organisms as well .
so with the help of some biologists studying the fungus , i got some maps and some gps coordinates and chartered a plane and started looking for the death rings , the circular patterns in which the fungus kills the trees .
so i 'm not sure if there are any in this photo , but i do know the fungus is down there .
and then this back down on the ground and you can see that the fungus is actually invading this tree .
so that white material that you see in between the bark and the wood is the mycelial felt of the fungus , and what it 's doing -- it 's actually slowly strangling the tree to death by preventing the flow of water and nutrients .
so this strategy has served it pretty well --
it 's 2,400 years old .
and then from underground to underwater .
this is a brain coral living in tobago that 's around 2,000 years old .
and i had to overcome my fear of deep water to find this one .
this is at about 60 feet or 18 meters , depth .
and you 'll see , there 's some damage to the surface of the coral .
that was actually caused by a school of parrot fish that had started eating it , though luckily , they lost interest before killing it .
luckily still , it seems to be out of harm 's way of the recent oil spill .
but that being said , we just as easily could have lost one of the oldest living things on the planet , and the full impact of that disaster now this is something that i think is one of the most quietly resilient things on the planet .
this is clonal colony of quaking aspen trees , living in utah , that is literally 80,000 years old .
what looks like a forest is actually only one tree .
imagine that it 's one giant root system and each tree is a stem coming up from that system .
so what you have is one giant , interconnected , genetically identical individual that 's been living for 80,000 years .
it also happens to be male and , in theory immortal .
this is a clonal tree as well .
this is the spruce gran picea , which at 9,550 years is a mere babe in the woods .
the location of this tree is actually kept secret for its own protection .
i spoke to the biologist who discovered this tree , and he told me that that spindly growth you see there in the center is most likely a product of climate change .
as it 's gotten warmer on the top of the mountain , the vegetation zone is actually changing .
so we do n't even necessarily have to have direct contact with these organisms to have a very real impact on them .
this is the fortingall yew --
no , i 'm just kidding --
this is the fortingall yew .
but i put that slide in there because i 'm often asked if there are any animals in the project .
and aside from coral , the answer is no.
does anybody know how old the oldest tortoise is --
any guesses ?
rachel sussman : 300 ? no , 175 is the oldest living tortoise , so nowhere near 2,000 .
and then , you might have heard of this giant clam that was discovered off the coast of northern iceland that reached 405 years old .
however , it died in the lab as they were determining its age .
the most interesting discovery of late , i think is the so - called immortal jellyfish , which has actually been observed in the lab to be able to be able to revert back to the polyp state after reaching full maturity .
so that being said , it 's highly unlikely that any jellyfish would survive that long in the wild .
and back to the yew here .
so as you can see , it 's in a churchyard ;
it 's in scotland . it 's behind a protective wall .
and there are actually a number or ancient yews in churchyards around the u.k. , but if you do the math , you 'll remember it 's actually the yew trees that were there first , then the churches .
and now down to another part of the world .
i had the opportunity to travel around the limpopo province in south africa with an expert in baobab trees .
and we saw a number of them , and this is most likely the oldest .
it 's around 2,000 , and it 's called the sagole baobab .
and you know , i think of all of these organisms as palimpsests .
they contain thousands of years of their own histories within themselves , and they also contain records of natural and human events .
and the baobabs in particular are a great example of this .
you can see that this one has names carved into its trunk , but it also records some natural events .
so the baobabs , as they get older , tend to get pulpy in their centers and hollow out .
and this can create great natural shelters for animals , but they 've also been appropriated for some rather dubious human uses , including a bar , a prison and even a toilet inside of a tree .
and this brings me to another favorite of mine -- i think , because it is just so unusual .
this plant is called the welwitschia , and it lives only in parts of coastal namibia and angola , where it 's uniquely adapted to collect moisture from mist coming off the sea .
and what 's more , it 's actually a tree .
it 's a primitive conifer .
you 'll notice that it 's bearing cones down the center .
and what looks like two big heaps of leaves , is actually two single leaves that get shredded up by the harsh desert conditions over time .
and it actually never sheds those leaves , so it also bears the distinction of having the longest leaves in the plant kingdom .
i spoke to a biologist at the kirstenbosch botanical garden in capetown to ask him where he thought this remarkable plant came from , and his thought was that if you travel around namibia , you see that there are a number of petrified forests , and the logs are all -- the logs are all giant coniferous trees , and yet there 's no sign of where they might have come from .
so his thought was that flooding in the north of africa actually brought those coniferous trees down tens of thousands of years ago , and what resulted was this remarkable adaptation to this unique desert environment .
this is what i think is the most poetic of the oldest living things .
this is something called an underground forest .
so , i spoke to a botanist at the pretoria botanical garden , who explained that certain species of trees have adapted to this region .
it 's bushfelt region , which is dry and prone to a lot of fires , as so what these trees have done is , if you can imagine that this is the crown of the tree , and that this is ground level , imagine that the whole thing , that whole bulk of the tree , migrated underground , and you just have those leaves peeping up above the surface .
that way , when a fire roars through , it 's the equivalent of getting your eyebrows singed .
the tree can easily recover .
these also tend to grow clonally , the oldest of which is 13,000 years old .
back in the u.s. , there 's a couple plants of similar age .
this is the clonal creosote bush , which is around 12,000 years old .
if you 've been in the american west , you know the creosote bush is pretty ubiquitous , but that being said , you see that this has this unique , circular form .
and what 's happening is it 's expanding slowly outwards from that original shape .
and it 's one -- again , that interconnected root system , making it one genetically identical individual .
it also has a friend nearby -- well , i think they 're friends .
this is the clonal mojave yucca , it 's about a mile away , and it 's a little bit older than 12,000 years .
and you see it has that similar circular form .
and there 's some younger clones dotting the landscape behind it .
and both of these , the yucca and the creosote bush , live on bureau of land management land , and that 's very different from being protected in a national park .
in fact , this land is designated for recreational all - terrain vehicle use .
so , now i want to show what very well might be the oldest living thing on the planet .
this is siberian actinobacteria , which is between 400,000 and 600,000 years old .
this bacteria was discovered several years ago by a team of planetary biologists hoping to find clues to life on other planets by looking at one of the harshest conditions on ours .
and what they found , by doing research into the permafrost , was this bacteria .
but what 's unique about it is that it 's doing dna repair below freezing .
and what that means is that it 's not dormant -- it 's actually been living and growing for half a million years .
it 's also probably one the most vulnerable of the oldest living things , because if the permafrost melts , it wo n't survive .
this is a map that i 've put together of the oldest living things , so you can get a sense of where they are ; you see they 're all over the world .
the blue flags represent things that i 've already photographed , and the reds are places that i 'm still trying to get to .
you 'll see also , there 's a flag on antarctica .
i 'm trying to travel there to find 5,000 year - old moss , which lives on the antarctic peninsula .
so , i probably have about two more years left on this project -- on this phase of the project , but after five years , i really feel like i know what 's at the heart of this work .
the oldest living things in the world are a record and celebration of our past , a call to action in the present and a barometer of our future .
they 've survived for millennia in desert , in the permafrost , at the tops of mountains and at the bottom of the ocean .
they 've withstood untold natural perils and human encroachments , but now some of them are in jeopardy , and they ca n't just get up and get out of the way .
it 's my hope that , by going to find these organisms , that i can help draw attention to their remarkable resilience and help play a part in insuring their continued longevity into the foreseeable future .
thank you .
