i want to talk to you a little bit about user - generated content .
i 'm going to tell you three stories on the way to one argument that 's going to tell you a little bit about how we open user - generated content up for business . 1906 . this man , john philip sousa , traveled to this place , the united states capitol , to talk about this technology , what he called the , quote , " talking machines . " sousa was not a fan of the talking machines .
" these talking machines are going to ruin artistic development
of music in this country .
when i was a boy , in front of every house in the summer evenings , you would find young people together
singing the songs of the day , or the old songs .
today , you hear these infernal machines going night and day .
we will not have a vocal chord left , " sousa said .
" the vocal chords will be eliminated by a process of evolution as was the tail of man when he came from the ape . " now , this is the picture i want you to focus on .
this is a picture of culture .
we could describe it using modern computer terminology as a kind of read - write culture . it 's a culture where people participate in the creation
and the re - creation of their culture . in that sense , it 's read - write .
sousa 's fear was that we would lose that capacity because of these , quote , " infernal machines . " they would take it away .
and in its place , we 'd have the opposite of read - write culture , what we could call read - only culture .
culture where creativity was consumed but the consumer is not a creator .
a culture which is top - down , owned , where the vocal chords of the millions have been lost .
now , as you look back at the twentieth century , at least in what we think of as the , quote , " developed world " --
hard not to conclude that sousa was right .
never before in the history of human culture had it been as professionalized , never before as concentrated . never before has creativity of the millions been as effectively displaced , and displaced because of these , quote , " infernal machines . "
the twentieth century was that century where , at least for those places we know the best , culture moved from this read - write to read - only existence .
so , second . land is a kind of property --
it is property . it 's protected by law .
as lord blackstone described it , land is protected by trespass law , for most of the history of trespass law , by presuming it protects the land all the way down below and to an indefinite extent upward .
now , that was a pretty good system for most of the history of the regulation of land , until this technology came along , and people began to wonder , were these instruments trespassers
as they flew over land without clearing the rights of the farms below as they traveled across the country ?
well , in 1945 , supreme court got a chance to address that question .
two farmers , thomas lee and tinie causby , who raised chickens , had a significant complaint because of these technologies . the complaint was that their chickens followed the pattern of the airplanes and flew themselves into the walls of the barn
when the airplanes flew over the land .
and so they appealed to lord blackstone
to say these airplanes were trespassing .
since time immemorial , the law had said , you ca n't fly over the land without permission of the landowner , so this flight must stop .
well , the supreme court considered this 100 - years tradition and said , in an opinion written by justice douglas , that the causbys must lose .
the supreme court said the doctrine protecting land all the way to the sky has no place in the modern world , otherwise every transcontinental flight would subject the operator to countless trespass suits .
common sense , a rare idea in the law , but here it was . common sense --
-- revolts at the idea . common sense .
finally . before the internet , the last great terror to rain down on the content industry was a terror created by this technology . broadcasting :
a new way to spread content , and therefore a new battle over the control of the businesses that would spread content .
now , at that time , the entity , the legal cartel , that controlled the performance rights for most of the music that would be broadcast
using these technologies was ascap .
they had an exclusive license on the most popular content , and they exercised it in a way that tried to demonstrate to the broadcasters who really was in charge .
so , between 1931 and 1939 , they raised rates by some 448 percent , until the broadcasters finally got together
and said , okay , enough of this .
and in 1939 , a lawyer , sydney kaye , started something called broadcast music inc. we know it as bmi .
and bmi was much more democratic in the art that it would include within its repertoire , including african american music for the first time in the repertoire .
but most important was that bmi took public domain works and made arrangements of them , which they gave away for free
to their subscribers . so that in 1940 , when ascap threatened to double their rates , the majority of broadcasters switched to bmi .
now , ascap said they did n't care . the people will revolt , they predicted , because the very best music was no longer available , because they had shifted to the second best public domain provided by bmi .
well , they did n't revolt , and in 1941 , ascap cracked .
and the important point to recognize is that even though these broadcasters were broadcasting something you would call second best , that competition was enough to break , at that time , this legal cartel over access to music .
okay . three stories . here 's the argument .
in my view , the most significant thing to recognize about what this internet is doing is its opportunity to revive the read - write culture that sousa romanticized .
digital technology is the opportunity for the revival of these vocal chords that he spoke so passionately to congress about .
user - generated content , spreading in businesses in extraordinarily valuable ways like these ,
celebrating amateur culture .
by which i do n't mean amateurish culture ,
i mean culture where people produce for the love of what they 're doing and not for the money . i mean the culture that your kids are producing all the time .
for when you think of what sousa romanticized in the young people together , singing the songs of the day , of the old songs , you should recognize what your kids are doing right now . taking the songs of the day and the old songs
and remixing them to make them something different .
it 's how they understand access to this culture .
so , let 's have some very few examples
to get a sense of what i 'm talking about here .
here 's something called anime music video , first example , taking anime captured from television
re - edited to music tracks .
this one you should be -- confidence . jesus survives . do n't worry .
and this is the best .
my love ...
there 's only you in my life ...
the only thing that 's bright ...
my first love ...
you 're every breath that i take ...
you 're every step i make ...
and i ....
i want to share all my love with you ...
no one else will do ...
and your eyes ...
they tell me how much you care ...
so , this is remix , right ?
and it 's important to emphasize that what this is not
is not what we call , quote , " piracy . "
i 'm not talking about nor justifying people taking other people 's content in wholesale and distributing it without the permission of the copyright owner .
i 'm talking about people taking and recreating using other people 's content , using digital technologies to say things differently .
now , the importance of this
is not the technique that you 've seen here .
because , of course , every technique that you 've seen here is something that television and film producers the importance is that that technique has been democratized .
it is now anybody with access to a $ 1,500 computer who can take sounds and images from the culture around us
and use it to say things differently .
these tools of creativity have become tools of speech .
it is a literacy for this generation . this is how our kids speak .
it is how our kids think . it is what your kids are as they increasingly understand digital technologies and their relationship to themselves .
now , in response to this new use of culture using digital technologies , the law has not greeted this sousa revival with very much common sense .
instead , the architecture of copyright law and the architecture of digital technologies , as they interact , have produced the presumption
that these activities are illegal .
because if copyright law at its core regulates something called copies , then in the digital world the one fact we ca n't escape is that every single use of culture produces a copy .
every single use therefore requires permission ;
without permission , you are a trespasser .
you 're a trespasser with about as much sense
as these people were trespassers .
common sense here , though , has not yet revolted in response to this response that the law has offered to these forms of creativity .
instead , what we 've seen
is something much worse than a revolt .
there 's a growing extremism that comes from both sides in this debate , in response to this conflict between the law and the use of these technologies .
one side builds new technologies , such as one recently announced that will enable them to automatically take down from sites like youtube any content that has any copyrighted content in it , whether or not there 's a judgment of fair use that might be applied to the use of that content .
and on the other side , among our kids , there 's a growing copyright abolitionism , a generation that rejects the very notion of what copyright is supposed to do , rejects copyright and believes that the law is nothing more than an ass to be ignored and to be fought at every opportunity possible .
the extremism on one side begets extremism on the other , a fact we should have learned many , many times over , and both extremes in this debate are just wrong .
now , the balance that i try to fight for ,
i , as any good liberal , try to fight for first
by looking to the government . total mistake , right ?
looked first to the courts and the legislatures to try to get them
to do something to make the system make more sense .
it failed partly because the courts are too passive ,
partly because the legislatures are corrupted ,
by which i do n't mean that there 's bribery operating to stop real change , but more the economy of influence that governs how congress functions means that policymakers here will not understand this
until it 's too late to fix it .
so , we need something different , we need a different kind of solution . and the solution here , in my view , is a private solution , a solution that looks to legalize what it is to be young again , and to realize the economic potential of that , and that 's where the story of bmi becomes relevant .
because , as bmi demonstrated , competition here can achieve some form of balance . the same thing can happen now .
we do n't have a public domain to draw upon now , so instead what we need is two types of changes .
first , that artists and creators embrace the idea , choose that their work be made available more freely .
so , for example , they can say their work is available freely for non - commercial , this amateur - type of use ,
but not freely for any commercial use .
and second , we need the businesses that are building out this read - write culture to embrace this opportunity expressly , to enable it , so that this ecology of free content , or freer content , can grow on a neutral platform where they both exist simultaneously , so that more - free can compete with less - free , and the opportunity to develop the creativity in that competition can teach one the lessons of the other .
now , i would talk about one particular such plan that i know something about , but i do n't want to violate ted 's first commandment of selling ,
so i 'm not going to talk about this at all .
i 'm instead just going to remind you of the point that bmi teaches us .
that artist choice is the key for new technology having an opportunity to be open for business , and we need to build artist choice here if these new technologies are to have that opportunity .
but let me end with something i think much more important -- much more important than business . it 's the point about how this connects to our kids .
we have to recognize they 're different from us . this is us , right ?
we made mixed tapes ; they remix music .
we watched tv ; they make tv .
it is technology that has made them different , and as we see what this technology can do , we need to recognize you ca n't kill the instinct the technology produces . we can only criminalize it .
we ca n't stop our kids from using it .
we can only drive it underground .
we ca n't make our kids passive again . we can only make them , quote , " pirates . " and is that good ?
we live in this weird time . it 's kind of age of prohibitions , where in many areas of our life , we live life constantly against the law .
ordinary people live life against the law ,
and that 's what i -- we are doing to our kids .
they live life knowing they live it against the law .
that realization is extraordinarily corrosive ,
extraordinarily corrupting .
and in a democracy , we ought to be able to do better .
do better , at least for them , if not for opening for business .
thank you very much .
