once upon a time , there was a dread disease that afflicted children .
and in fact , among all the diseases that existed in this land , it was the worst . it killed the most children .
and along came a brilliant inventor , a scientist , who came up with a partial cure for that disease .
and it was n't perfect . many children still died , but it was certainly better than what they had before .
and one of the good things about this cure was that it was free , virtually free , and was very easy to use .
but the worst thing about it was that you could n't use it on the youngest children , on infants , and on one - year - olds .
and so , as a consequence , a few years later , another scientist -- perhaps maybe this scientist not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him , but building on the invention of the first one -- came up with a second cure .
and the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one - year - olds .
and the problem with this cure was it was very expensive , and it was very complicated to use .
and although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly , almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end .
but what they did , of course , since it was so complicated and expensive , they only used it on the zero - year - olds and the one - year - olds .
and they kept on using the existing cure that they had on the two - year - olds and up .
and this went on for quite some time . people were happy .
they had their two cures . until a particular mother , whose child had just turned two , died of this disease .
and she thought to herself , " my child just turned two , and until the child turned two , i had always used this complicated , expensive cure , you know , this treatment .
and then the child turned two , and i started using the cheap and easy treatment , and i wonder " --
and she wondered , like all parents who lose children wonder -- " if there is n't something that i could have done , like keep on using that complicated , expensive cure . "
and she told all the other people , and she said , " how could it possibly be that something that 's cheap and simple works as well as something that 's complicated and expensive ? "
and the people thought , " you know , you 're right .
it probably is the wrong thing to do to switch and use the cheap and simple solution . "
and the government , they heard her story and the other people , and they said , " yeah , you 're right , we should make a law .
we should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment and not let anybody use this on their children . "
and the people were happy . they were satisfied .
for many years this went along , and everything was fine .
but then along came a lowly economist , who had children himself , and he used the expensive and complicated treatment .
but he knew about the cheap and simple one .
and he thought about it , and the expensive one did n't seem that great to him . so he thought , " i do n't know anything about science , but i do know something about data , so maybe i should go and look at the data and see whether this expensive and complicated treatment actually works any better than the cheap and simple one . "
and lo and behold , when he went through the data , he found that it did n't look like the expensive , complicated solution was any better than the cheap one ,
at least for the children who were two and older -- the cheap one still did n't work on the kids who were younger .
and so , he went forth to the people and he said , " i 've made this wonderful finding : it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution ,
and by doing so we could save ourselves 300 million dollars a year , and we could spend that on our children in other ways . "
and the parents were very unhappy , and they said , " this is a terrible thing , because how can the cheap and easy thing be as good as the hard thing ? " and the government was very upset . and in particular , the people who made this expensive solution were very upset because they thought , " how can we hope to compete with something that 's essentially free ?
we would lose all of our market . "
and people were very angry , and they called him horrible names .
and he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days , and seek out some more intelligent , open - minded people in a place called oxford , and come and try and tell the story at that place .
and so , anyway , here i am. it 's not a fairy tale .
it 's a true story about the united states today , and the disease i 'm referring to is actually motor vehicle accidents for children .
and the free cure is adult seatbelts , and the expensive cure -- the 300 - million - dollar - a - year cure -- is child car seats .
and what i 'd like to talk to you about today is some of the evidence why i believe this to be true : that for children two years old and up , there really is no real benefit -- proven benefit -- of car seats , in spite of the incredible energy that has been devoted toward expanding the laws and making it socially unacceptable to put your children into seatbelts . and then talk about why -- what is it that makes that true ?
and then , finally talk a little bit about a third way , about another technology , which is probably better than anything we have , but which -- there has n't been any enthusiasm for adoption precisely because people are so enamored with the current car seat solution . ok .
so , many times when you try to do research on data , it records complicated stories -- it 's hard to find in the data . it does n't turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats .
so the united states keeps a data set of every fatal accident that 's happened since 1975 .
so in every car crash in which at least one person dies , they have information on all of the people .
so if you look at that data -- it 's right up on the national highway transportation safety administration 's website --
you can just look at the raw data , and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that 's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up .
so , here is the data . here i have , among two - to six - year - olds -- anyone above six , basically no one uses car seats , so you ca n't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained in a crash in which at least one person dies , themselves die .
if you put a child in a car seat , 18.2 percent of the children die .
if they 're wearing a lap - and - shoulder belt , in this raw data , 19.4 percent die . and interestingly , wearing a lap - only seatbelt , 16.7 percent die . and actually , the theory tells you that the lap - only seatbelt 's got to be worse than the lap - and - shoulder belt . and that just reminds you that when you deal with raw data , there are hundreds of confounding variables that may be getting in the way .
so what we do in the study is -- and this is just presenting the same information , but turned into a figure to make it easier .
so the yellow bar represents car seats , the orange bar lap - and - shoulder , and the red bar lap - only seatbelts .
and this is all relative to unrestrained --
the bigger the bar , the better . okay .
so , this is the data i just showed , ok ?
so the highest bar is what you 're striving to beat .
so you can control for the basic things , like how hard the crash was , what seat the child was sitting in , etc. , the age of the child .
and that 's that middle set of bars .
and so , you can see that the lap - only seatbelts start to look worse once you do that .
and then finally , the last set of bars , which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash ,
50 , 75 , 100 different characteristics of the crash .
and what you find is that the car seats and the lap - and - shoulder belts , when it comes to saving lives , fatalities look exactly identical .
and the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well .
and it 's not just overall . it 's very robust to anything you want to look at .
one thing that 's interesting : if you look at frontal - impact crashes -- when the car crashes , the front hits into something -- indeed , what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better .
and i think this is n't just chance .
in order to have the car seat approved , you need to pass certain federal standards , all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash .
but when you look at other types of crashes , like rear - impact crashes , indeed , the car seats do n't perform as well .
and i think that 's because they 've been optimized to pass , as we always expect people to do , to optimize relative to bright - line rules about how affected the car will be .
and the other thing you might argue is , " well , car seats have got a lot better over time .
and so if we look at recent crashes -- the whole data set is almost 30 years ' worth of data -- you wo n't see it in the recent crashes . the new car seats are far , far better . "
but indeed , in recent crashes the lap - and - shoulder seatbelts , actually , are doing even better than the car seats .
they say , " well , that 's impossible , that ca n't be . "
and the line of argument , if you ask parents , is , " but car seats are so expensive and complicated , and they have this big tangle of latches , how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated ? "
it 's kind of an interesting logic , i think , that people use . and the other logic , they say , " well , the government would n't have told us [ to ] use them if they were n't much better . "
but what 's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much .
it really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two , which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data .
so you can only get so far , i think , in telling your story by using these abstract statistics .
and so i had some friends over to dinner , and i was asking -- we had a cookout -- i was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point . they said , " why do n't you run some crash tests ? "
and i said , " that 's a great idea . "
so we actually tried to commission some crash tests .
and it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country , none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said , some explicitly , some not so explicitly , " all of our business comes from car seat manufacturers .
we ca n't risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats . "
now , eventually , one did . under the conditions of anonymity ,
they said they would be happy to do this test for us --
so anonymity , and 1,500 dollars per seat that we crashed .
and so , we went to buffalo , new york , and here is the precursor to it .
these are the crash test dummies , waiting for their chance to take the center stage .
and then , here 's how the crash test works .
here , they do n't actually crash the entire car , you know -- it 's not worth ruining a whole car to do it .
so they just have these bench seats , and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it .
so i just wanted you to look at this .
and i think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great . look at the kid in the car seat .
does he not look content , ready to go , like he could survive anything ? and then , if you look at the kid in back , it looks like he 's already choking before the crash even happens .
it 's hard to believe , when you look at this , that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash .
so this is going to be a crash where they 're going to slam this thing forward into a wall at 30 miles an hour , and see what happens . ok ?
so , let me show you what happens .
these are three - year - old dummies , by the way .
so here -- this is the car seat . now watch two things :
watch how the head goes forward , and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat --
and watch how the car seat flies around , in the rebound , up in the air .
the car seat 's moving all over the place .
bear in mind there are two things about this .
this is a car seat that was installed by someone who has installed 1,000 car seats , who knew exactly how to do it .
and also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats .
having a flat back makes it much easier to install them .
and so this is a test that 's very much rigged in favor of the car seat ,
ok ? so , that kid in this crash fared very well .
the federal standards are that you have to score below a 1,000 to be an approved car seat on this crash , in some metric of units which are not important .
and this crash would have been about a 450 .
so this car seat was actually an above - average car seat from consumer reports , and did quite well .
so the next one . now , this is the kid , same crash , who is in the seatbelt . he hardly moves at all , actually , relative to the other child . the funny thing is , the cam work is terrible because they 've only set it up to do the car seats , and so , they actually do n't even have a way to move the camera so you can see the kid that 's on the rebound .
anyway , it turns out that those two crashes , that actually the three - year - old did slightly worse . so , he gets about a 500 out of -- you know , on this range -- relative to a 400 and something .
but still , if you just took that data from that crash to the federal government , and said , " i have invented a new car seat .
i would like you to approve it for selling , " then they would say , " this is a fantastic new car seat , it works great .
it only got a 500 , it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000 . "
and this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat .
so , in some sense , what this is suggesting is that it 's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong , which is putting children at risk . it 's just that , fundamentally , the car seats are n't doing much .
so here 's the crash . so these are timed at the same time ,
so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat -- at rebound , it takes a lot longer -- but there 's just a lot less movement for child who 's in the seatbelt .
so , i 'll show you the six - year - old crashes as well .
the six - year - old is in a car seat , and it turns out that looks terrible , but that 's great . that 's like a 400 , ok ?
so that kid would do fine in the crash .
nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all .
and then here 's the six - year - old in the seatbelt , and in fact , they get exactly within , you know , within one or two points of the same . so really , for the six - year - old , the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever .
that 's some more evidence , so in some sense -- i was criticized by a scientist , who said , " you could never publish a study with an n of 4 , " meaning those four crashes .
so i wrote him back and i said , " what about an n of 45,004 ? "
because i had the other 45,000 other real - world crashes .
and i just think that it 's interesting that the idea of using real - world crashes , which is very much something that economists think would be the right thing to do , is something that scientists do n't actually , usually think -- they would rather use a laboratory , a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies , than actually 30 years of data of what we 've seen with children and with car seats .
and so i think the answer to this puzzle is that there 's a much better solution out there , that 's gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working .
and if you think from a design perspective , about going back to square one , and say , " i just want to protect kids in the back seat . "
i do n't there 's anyone in this room who 'd say , " well , the right way to start would be , let 's make a great seat belt for adults .
and then , let 's make this really big contraption that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain . "
i mean , why not start -- who 's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids ?
but essentially , do something like this , which i do n't know exactly how much it would cost to do , but there 's no reason i could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat .
it 's just actually -- you see , this is folding up -- it 's behind the seat .
you 've got a regular seat for adults , and then you fold it down , and the kid sits on top , and it 's integrated .
it seems to me that this ca n't be a very expensive solution , and it 's got to work better than what we already have .
so the question is , is there any hope for adoption of something like this , which would presumably save a lot of lives ?
and i think the answer , perhaps , lies in a story .
the answer both to why has a car seat been so successful , and why this may someday be adopted or not , lies in a story that my dad told me , relating to when he was a doctor in the u.s. air force in england . and this is a long time ago :
you were allowed to do things then you ca n't do today .
so , my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick .
and he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them , and he 'd say , " come back in a week , if you still feel lousy . "
ok , and most of them would not come back , but some of them would come back .
and when they came back , he , still convinced they were not sick , had another jar of pills . in this jar were huge horse pills .
they were almost impossible to swallow .
and these , to me , are the analogy for the car seats .
people would look at these and say , " man , this thing is so big and so hard to swallow . if this does n't make me feel better , you know , what possibly could ? "
and it turned out that most people would n't come back , because it worked . but every once in a while , there was still a patient convinced that he was sick , and he 'd come back . and my dad had a third jar of pills .
and the jar of pills he had , he said , were the tiniest little pills he could find , so small you could barely see them .
and he would say , listen , i know i gave you that huge pill , that complicated , hard - to - swallow pill before , but now i 've got one that 's so potent , that is really tiny and small and almost invisible . it 's almost like this thing here , which you ca n't even see . "
and it turned out that never , in all the times my dad gave out this pill , the really tiny pill , did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness .
so , my dad always took that as evidence that this little , teeny , powerful pill had the ultimate placebo effect . and in some sense , if that 's the right story , i think integrated car seats you will see , very quickly , becoming something that everyone has . the other possible conclusion is , well , maybe after coming to my father three times , getting sent home with placebos , he still felt sick , he went and found another doctor .
and that 's completely possible . and if that 's the case , then i think we 're stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come .
thank you very much .
( audience : i just wanted to ask you , when we wear seatbelts we do n't necessarily wear them just to prevent loss of life , it 's also to prevent lots of serious injury .
your data looks at fatalities . it does n't look at serious injury .
is there any data to show that child seats are actually less effective , or just as effective as seatbelts for serious injury ? because that would prove your case . ) steven levitt : yeah , that 's a great question . in my data , and in another data set i 've looked at for new jersey crashes , i find very small differences in injury .
so in this data , it 's statistically insignificant differences in injury between car seats and lap - and - shoulder belts .
in the new jersey data , which is different , because it 's not just fatal crashes , but all crashes in new jersey that are reported ,
it turns out that there is a 10 percent difference in injuries , but generally they 're the minor injuries .
now , what 's interesting , i should say this as a disclaimer , there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data , which suggests that car seats are dramatically better .
and they use a completely different methodology that involves -- after the crash occurs , they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash , and they call them on the phone , and they asked them what happened .
and i really ca n't resolve , yet , and i 'd like to work with these medical researchers to try to understand how there can be these differences , which are completely at odds with one another .
but it 's obviously a critical question . the question is even if -- are there enough serious injuries to make these cost - effective ? it 's kind of tricky .
even if they 're right , it 's not so clear that they 're so cost - effective .
