" what i will " i will not dance to your war drum .
i will not lend my soul nor my bones to your war drum .
i will not dance to that beating .
i know that beat .
it is lifeless .
i know intimately that skin you are hitting .
it was alive once , hunted , stolen , stretched .
i will not dance to your drummed - up war .
i will not pop , spin , break for you .
i will not hate for you or even hate you .
i will not kill for you .
especially i will not die for you .
i will not mourn the dead with murder nor suicide .
i will not side with you or dance to bombs because everyone is dancing .
everyone can be wrong .
life is a right , not collateral or casual .
i will not forget where i come from .
i will craft my own drum .
gather my beloved near , and our chanting will be dancing .
our humming will be drumming .
i will not be played .
i will not lend my name nor my rhythm to your beat .
i will dance and resist and dance and persist and dance .
this heartbeat is louder than death .
your war drum ai n't louder than this breath . haaa .
what 's up ted people ? let me hear you make some noise .
a bunch of pacifists .
confused , aspiring pacifists .
i understand .
i 've been wrong a lot lately .
like a lot .
so i could n't figure out what to read today .
i mean , i 've been saying i 've been prepping .
what that means is prepping my outfit , prepping options , trying to figure out what i 'm coming behind and going in front of .
poetry does that .
it preps you . it aims you .
so i am going to read a poem that was chosen just now .
but i 'm going to need you to just sit for like 10 minutes and hold a woman who is not here .
hold her now with you .
you do n't need to say her name out loud , you can just hold her .
are you holding her ?
this is " break clustered . " all holy history banned .
unwritten books predicted the future , projected the past .
but my head unwraps around what appears limitless , man 's creative violence .
whose son shall it be ?
which male child will perish a new day ?
our boys ' deaths galvanize .
we cherish corpses .
we mourn women , complicated .
bitches get beat daily .
profits made , prophets ignored .
war and tooth , enameled salted lemon childhoods .
all colors run , none of us solid .
do n't look for shadow behind me . i carry it within .
i live cycles of light and darkness .
rhythm is half silence .
i see now , i never was one and not the other .
sickness , health , tender violence .
i think now i never was pure .
before form i was storm , blind , ign'ant -- still am.
human contracted itself blind , malignant .
i never was pure .
girl spoiled before ripened .
language ca n't math me .
i experience exponentially .
everything is everything .
one woman loses 15 , maybe 20 , members of her family .
one woman loses six .
one woman loses her head .
one woman searches rubble . one woman feeds on trash .
one woman shoots her face . one woman shoots her husband .
one woman straps herself .
one woman gives birth to a baby .
one woman gives birth to borders .
one woman no longer believes love will ever find her .
one woman never did .
where do refugee hearts go ?
broken , dissed , placed where they 're not from , do n't want to be missed .
faced with absence .
we mourn each one or we mean nothing at all .
my spine curves spiral .
precipice running to and running from human beings .
cluster bombs left behind .
de facto landmines .
a smoldering grief .
harvest contaminated tobacco .
harvest bombs .
harvest baby teeth . harvest palms , smoke .
harvest witness , smoke .
resolutions , smoke .
salvation , smoke .
redemption , smoke .
breathe .
do not fear what has blown up .
if you must , fear the unexploded . thank you .
