imagine a big explosion as you climb through 3,000 ft.
imagine a plane full of smoke .
imagine an engine going clack , clack , clack , clack , clack , clack , clack .
it sounds scary .
well i had a unique seat that day . i was sitting in _UNK_ .
i was the only one who could talk to the flight _UNK_ .
so i looked at them right away , and they said , " no problem . we probably hit some birds . "
the pilot had already turned the plane around , and we were n't that far .
you could see manhattan .
two minutes later , three things happened at the same time .
the pilot lines up the plane with the hudson river .
that 's usually not the route .
he turns off the engines .
now imagine being in a plane with no sound .
and then he says three words -- the most unemotional three words i 've ever heard .
he says , " brace for impact . "
i did n't have to talk to the flight attendant anymore .
i could see in her eyes , it was terror . life was over .
now i want to share with you three things i learned about myself that day .
i learned that it all changes in an instant .
we have this bucket list , we have these things we want to do in life , and i thought about all the people i wanted to reach out to that i did n't , all the fences i wanted to mend , all the experiences i wanted to have and i never did .
as i thought about that later on , i came up with a saying , which is , " i collect bad wines . "
because if the wine is ready and the person is there , i 'm opening it .
i no longer want to postpone anything in life .
and that urgency , that purpose , has really changed my life .
the second thing i learned that day -- and this is as we clear the george washington bridge , which was by not a lot -- i thought about , wow , i really feel one real regret .
i 've lived a good life .
in my own humanity and mistakes , i 've tried to get better at everything i tried .
but in my humanity , i also allow my ego to get in .
and i regretted the time i wasted on things that did not matter with people that matter .
and i thought about my relationship with my wife , with my friends , with people .
and after , as i reflected on that , i decided to eliminate negative energy from my life .
it 's not perfect , but it 's a lot better .
i 've not had a fight with my wife in two years .
it feels great .
i no longer try to be right ;
i choose to be happy .
the third thing i learned -- and this is as your mental clock starts going , " 15 , 14 , 13. "
you can see the water coming .
i 'm saying , " please blow up . "
i do n't want this thing to break in 20 pieces like you 've seen in those documentaries .
and as we 're coming down , i had a sense of , wow , dying is not scary .
it 's almost like we 've been preparing for it our whole lives .
but it was very sad .
i did n't want to go ; i love my life .
and that sadness really framed in one thought , which is , i only wish for one thing .
i only wish i could see my kids grow up .
about a month later , i was at a performance by my daughter -- first - grader , not much artistic talent ...
... yet .
and i 'm _UNK_ , i 'm crying , like a little kid .
and it made all the sense in the world to me .
i realized at that point , by connecting those two dots , that the only thing that matters in my life is being a great dad .
above all , above all , the only goal i have in life is to be a good dad .
i was given the gift of a miracle , of not dying that day .
i was given another gift , which was to be able to see into the future and come back and live differently .
i challenge you guys that are flying today , imagine the same thing happens on your plane -- and please do n't -- but imagine , and how would you change ?
what would you get done that you 're waiting to get done because you think you 'll be here forever ?
how would you change your relationships and the negative energy in them ?
and more than anything , are you being the best parent you can ?
thank you .
