the recent debate over copyright laws like sopa in the united states and the acta agreement in europe has been very emotional .
and i think some dispassionate , quantitative reasoning could really bring a great deal to the debate .
i 'd therefore like to propose that we employ , we enlist , the cutting edge field of copyright math whenever we approach this subject .
for instance , just recently the motion picture association revealed that our economy loses 58 billion dollars a year to copyright theft .
now rather than just argue about this number , a copyright mathematician will analyze it and he 'll soon discover that this money could stretch from this auditorium all the way across ocean boulevard to the westin , and then to mars ...
... if we use pennies .
now this is obviously a powerful , some might say dangerously powerful , insight .
but it 's also a morally important one .
because this is n't just the hypothetical retail value of some pirated movies that we 're talking about , but this is actual economic losses .
this is the equivalent to the entire american corn crop failing along with all of our fruit crops , as well as wheat , tobacco , rice , sorghum -- whatever sorghum is -- losing sorghum .
but identifying the actual losses to the economy is almost impossible to do unless we use copyright math . now music revenues are down by about eight billion dollars a year since napster first came on the scene .
so that 's a chunk of what we 're looking for .
but total movie revenues across theaters , home video and pay - per - view are up .
and tv , satellite and cable revenues are way up .
other content markets like book publishing and radio are also up .
so this small missing chunk here is puzzling .
since the big content markets have grown in line with historic norms , it 's not additional growth that piracy has prevented , but copyright math tells us it must therefore be foregone growth in a market that has no historic norms -- one that did n't exist in the 90 's .
what we 're looking at here is the insidious cost of ringtone piracy .
50 billion dollars of it a year , which is enough , at 30 seconds a ringtone , that could stretch from here to neanderthal times .
it 's true .
i have excel .
the movie folks also tell us that our economy loses over 370,000 jobs to content theft , which is quite a lot when you consider that , back in '98 , the bureau of labor statistics indicated that the motion picture and video industries were employing 270,000 people .
other data has the music industry at about 45,000 people .
and so the job losses that came with the internet and all that content theft , have therefore left us with negative employment in our content industries .
and this is just one of the many mind - blowing statistics that copyright mathematicians have to deal with every day .
and some people think that string theory is tough .
now this is a key number from the copyright mathematicians ' toolkit .
it 's the precise amount of harm that comes to media companies whenever a single copyrighted song or movie gets pirated .
hollywood and congress derived this number mathematically
back when they last sat down to improve copyright damages and made this law .
some people think this number 's a little bit large , but copyright mathematicians who are media lobby experts are merely surprised that it does n't get compounded for inflation every year .
now when this law first passed , the world 's hottest mp 3 player could hold just 10 songs .
and it was a big christmas hit .
because what little hoodlum would n't want a million and a half bucks - worth of stolen goods in his pocket .
these days an ipod classic can hold 40,000 songs , which is to say eight billion dollars - worth of stolen media .
or about 75,000 jobs .
now you might find copyright math strange , but that 's because it 's a field that 's best left to experts .
i hope you 'll join me next time when i will be making an equally scientific and fact - based inquiry into the cost of alien music piracy to he american economy .
thank you very much .
thank you .
