my journey to coming here today started in 1974 .
that 's me with the funny gloves .
i was 17 and going on a peace walk .
what i did n't know though , was most of those people , standing there with me , were moonies .
and within a week i had come to believe that the second coming of christ had occurred , that it was sun myung moon , and that i had been specially chosen and prepared by god to be his disciple .
now as cool as that sounds , my family was not that thrilled with this .
and they tried everything they could to get me out of there .
there was an underground railroad of sorts that was going on during those years . maybe some of you remember it .
they were called deprogrammers .
and after about five long years my family had me deprogrammed .
and i then became a deprogrammer .
i started going out on cases .
and after about five years of doing this , i was arrested for kidnapping .
most of the cases i went out on were called involuntary .
what happened was that the family had to get their loved ones some safe place somehow .
and so they took them to some safe place .
and we would come in and talk to them , usually for about a week .
and so after this happened , i decided it was a good time to turn my back on this work .
and about 20 years went by .
there was a burning question though that would not leave me . and that was , " how did this happen to me ? "
and in fact , what did happen to my brain ?
because something did .
and so i decided to write a book , a memoir , about this decade of my life .
and toward the end of writing that book there was a documentary that came out . it was on jonestown .
and it had a chilling effect on me .
these are the dead in jonestown .
about 900 people died that day ,
most of them taking their own lives .
women gave poison to their babies , and watched foam come from their mouths as they died .
the top picture is a group of moonies that have been blessed by their messiah .
their mates were chosen for them .
the bottom picture is hitler youth .
this is the leg of a suicide bomber .
the thing i had to admit to myself , with great repulsion ,
was that i get it .
i understand how this could happen .
i understand how someone 's brain , how someone 's mind can come to the place where it makes sense --
in fact it would be wrong , when your brain is working like that -- not to try to save the world through genocide .
and so what is this ? how does this work ?
and how i 've come to view what happened to me is a viral , memetic infection .
for those of you who are n't familiar with memetics , a meme has been defined as an idea that replicates in the human brain and moves from brain to brain like a virus ,
much like a virus . the way a virus works is -- it can infect and do the most damage to someone who has a compromised immune system .
in 1974 , i was young , i was naive , and i was pretty lost in my world .
i was really idealistic .
these easy ideas to complex questions are very appealing when you are emotionally vulnerable .
what happens is that circular logic takes over . " moon is one with god . god is going to fix all the problems in the world . all i have to do is humbly follow . because god is going to stop war and hunger -- all these things i wanted to do --
all i have to do is humbly follow .
because after all , god is [ working through ] the messiah . he 's going to fix all this . "
it becomes impenetrable . and the most dangerous part of this is that is creates " us " and " them , " " right " and " wrong , " " good " and " evil . " and it makes anything possible , makes anything rationalizable .
and the thing is , though , if you looked at my brain during those years in the moonies -- neuroscience is expanding exponentially , as ray kurzweil said yesterday . science is expanding .
we 're beginning to look inside the brain .
and so if you looked at my brain , or any brain that 's infected with a viral memetic infection like this , and compared it to anyone in this room , or anyone who uses critical thinking on a regular basis , i am convinced it would look very , very different .
and that , strange as it may sound , gives me hope .
and the reason that gives me hope is that the first thing is to admit that we have a problem .
but it 's a human problem . it 's a scientific problem , if you will .
it happens in the human brain . there is no evil force out there to get us .
and so this is something that , through research and education , i believe that we can solve .
and so the first step is to realize that we can do this together ,
and that there is no " us " and " them . "
thank you very much .
