i 'm sure that , throughout the hundred - thousand - odd years of our species ' existence , and even before , our ancestors looked up at the night sky , and wondered what stars are .
wondering , therefore , how to explain what they saw in terms of things unseen .
okay , so , most people only wondered that occasionally , like today , in breaks from whatever normally preoccupied them .
but what normally preoccupied them also involved yearning to know . they wished they knew how to prevent their food supply from sometimes failing , and how they could rest when they were tired without risking starvation ,
be warmer , cooler , safer , in less pain .
i bet those prehistoric cave artists would have loved to know how to draw better .
in every aspect of their lives , they wished for progress , just as we do .
but they failed , almost completely , to make any .
they did n't know how to .
discoveries like fire happened so rarely , that from an individual 's point of view , the world never improved .
nothing new was learned .
the first clue to the origin of starlight happened as recently as 1899 : radioactivity .
within 40 years , physicists discovered the whole explanation , expressed , as usual , in elegant symbols .
but never mind the symbols .
think how many discoveries they represent .
nuclei and nuclear reactions , of course .
but isotopes , particles of electricity , antimatter , neutrinos , the conversion of mass to energy -- that 's e = mc ^ 2 -- gamma rays , transmutation . that ancient dream that had always eluded the alchemists was achieved through these same theories that explained starlight and other ancient mysteries , and new , unexpected phenomena .
that all that , discovered in 40 years , had not been in the previous hundred thousand , was not for lack of thinking about stars , and all those other urgent problems they had .
they even arrived at answers , such as myths , that dominated their lives , yet bore almost no resemblance to the truth .
the tragedy of that protracted stagnation is n't sufficiently recognized , i think .
these were people with brains of essentially the same design that eventually did discover all those things .
but that ability to make progress remained almost unused , until the event that revolutionized the human condition and changed the universe .
or so we should hope .
because that event was the scientific revolution , ever since which our knowledge of the physical world , and of how to adapt it to our wishes , has been growing relentlessly .
now , what had changed ?
what were people now doing for the first time that made that difference between stagnation and rapid , open - ended discovery ?
how to make that difference is surely the most important universal truth that it is possible to know .
worryingly , there is no consensus about what it is .
so , i 'll tell you .
but i 'll have to backtrack a little first .
before the scientific revolution , they believed that everything important , knowable , was already known , enshrined in ancient writings , institutions , and in some genuinely useful rules of thumb -- which were , however , entrenched as dogmas , along with many falsehoods .
so they believed that knowledge came from authorities that actually knew very little .
and therefore progress depended on learning how to reject the authority of learned men , priests , traditions and rulers .
which is why the scientific revolution had to have a wider context . the enlightenment , a revolution in how people sought knowledge , trying not to rely on authority .
" take no one 's word for it . " but that ca n't be what made the difference .
authorities had been rejected before , many times .
and that rarely , if ever , caused anything like the scientific revolution .
at the time , what they thought distinguished science was a radical idea about things unseen , known as empiricism .
all knowledge derives from the senses .
well , we 've seen that that ca n't be true .
it did help by promoting observation and experiment .
but , from the outset , it was obvious that there was something horribly wrong with it .
knowledge comes from the senses .
in what language ? certainly not the language of mathematics , in which , galileo rightly said , the book of nature is written .
look at the world . you do n't see equations carved on to the mountainsides .
if you did , it would be because people had carved them .
by the way , why do n't we do that ?
what 's wrong with us ?
empiricism is inadequate because , well , scientific theories explain the seen in terms of the unseen .
and the unseen , you have to admit , does n't come to us through the senses .
we do n't see those nuclear reactions in stars .
we do n't see the origin of species .
we do n't see the curvature of space - time , and other universes .
but we know about those things .
how ?
well , the classic empiricist answer is induction .
the unseen resembles the seen . but it does n't .
you know what the clinching evidence was that space - time is curved ?
it was a photograph , not of space - time , but of an eclipse , with a dot there rather than there .
and the evidence for evolution ?
some rocks and some finches .
and parallel universes ? again : dots there , rather than there , on a screen .
what we see , in all these cases , bears no resemblance to the reality that we conclude is responsible -- only a long chain of theoretical reasoning and interpretation connects them .
" ah ! " say creationists . " so you admit it 's all interpretation .
no one has ever seen evolution .
we see rocks .
you have your interpretation . we have ours .
yours comes from guesswork , ours from the bible . " but what creationist and empiricists both ignore is that , in that sense , no one has ever seen a bible either , that the eye only detects light , which we do n't perceive .
brains only detect nerve impulses .
and they do n't perceive even those as what they really are , namely electrical crackles .
so we perceive nothing as what it really is .
our connection to reality is never just perception .
it 's always , as karl popper put it , theory - laden .
scientific knowledge is n't derived from anything .
it 's like all knowledge . it 's conjectural , guesswork , tested by observation , not derived from it .
so , were testable conjectures the great innovation that opened the intellectual prison gates ?
no. contrary to what 's usually said , testability is common , in myths and all sorts of other irrational modes of thinking .
any crank claiming the sun will go out next tuesday has got a testable prediction .
consider the ancient greek myth explaining seasons .
hades , god of the underworld , kidnaps persephone , the goddess of spring , and negotiates a forced marriage contract , requiring her to return regularly , and lets her go .
and each year , she is magically compelled to return .
and her mother , demeter , goddess of the earth , is sad , and makes it cold and barren .
that myth is testable .
if winter is caused by demeter 's sadness , then it must happen everywhere on earth simultaneously .
so if the ancient greeks had only known that australia is at its warmest when demeter is at her saddest , they 'd have known that their theory is false .
so what was wrong with that myth , and with all pre - scientific thinking , and what , then , made that momentous difference ?
i think there is one thing you have to care about .
and that implies testability , the scientific method , the enlightenment , and everything .
and here is the crucial thing .
there is such a thing as a defect in a story .
i do n't just mean a logical defect . i mean a bad explanation .
what does that mean ? well , explanation is an assertion about what 's there , unseen , that accounts for what 's seen .
because the explanatory role of persephone 's marriage contract could be played equally well by infinitely many other ad hoc entities .
why a marriage contract and not any other reason for regular annual action ?
here is one . persephone was n't released .
she escaped , and returns every spring to take revenge on hades , with her spring powers .
she cools his domain with spring air , venting heat up to the surface , creating summer .
that accounts for the same phenomena as the original myth .
it 's equally testable .
yet what it asserts about reality is , in many ways , the opposite .
and that is possible because the details of the original myth are unrelated to seasons , except via the myth itself .
this easy variability is the sign of a bad explanation ,
because , without a functional reason to prefer one of countless variants , advocating one of them , in preference to the others , is irrational .
so , for the essence of what makes the difference to enable progress , seek good explanations , the ones that ca n't be easily varied , while still explaining the phenomena .
now , our current explanation of seasons is that the earth 's axis is tilted like that , so each hemisphere tilts toward the sun for half the year , and away for the other half .
better put that up .
that 's a good explanation : hard to vary , because every detail plays a functional role .
for instance , we know , independently of seasons , that surfaces tilted away from radiant heat are heated less ,
and that a spinning sphere , in space , points in a constant direction .
and the tilt also explains the sun 's angle of elevation at different times of year , and predicts that the seasons will be out of phase in the two hemispheres .
if they 'd been observed in phase , the theory would have been refuted .
but now , the fact that it 's also a good explanation , hard to vary , makes the crucial difference .
if the ancient greeks had found out about seasons in australia , they could have easily varied their myth to predict that .
for instance , when demeter is upset , she banishes heat from her vicinity , into the other hemisphere , where it makes summer .
so , being proved wrong by observation , and changing their theory accordingly , still would n't have got the ancient greeks one jot closer to understanding seasons , because their explanation was bad : easy to vary .
and it 's only when an explanation is good that it even matters whether it 's testable .
if the axis - tilt theory had been refuted , its defenders would have had nowhere to go .
no easily implemented change could make that tilt cause the same seasons in both hemispheres .
the search for hard - to - vary explanations is the origin of all progress .
it 's the basic regulating principle of the enlightenment .
so , in science , two false approaches blight progress .
one is well known : untestable theories .
but the more important one is explanationless theories .
whenever you 're told that some existing statistical trend will continue , but you are n't given a hard - to - vary account of what causes that trend , you 're being told a wizard did it .
when you are told that carrots have human rights because they share half our genes -- but not how gene percentages confer rights -- wizard .
when someone announces that the nature - nurture debate has been settled because there is evidence that a given percentage of our political opinions are genetically inherited , but they do n't explain how genes cause opinions , they 've settled nothing . they are saying that our opinions are caused by wizards , and presumably so are their own .
that the truth consists of hard to vary assertions about reality is the most important fact about the physical world .
it 's a fact that is , itself , unseen , yet impossible to vary . thank you .
