contagious is a good word .
even in the times of h 1n1 , i like the word .
laughter is contagious . passion is contagious .
inspiration is contagious .
we 've heard some remarkable stories from some remarkable speakers .
but for me , what was contagious about all of them was that they were infected by something i call the " i can " bug .
so , the question is , why only them ?
in a country of a billion people and some , why so few ?
is it luck ? is it chance ?
can we all not systematically and consciously get infected ?
so , in the next eight minutes i would like to share with you my story .
i got infected when i was 17 , when , as a student of the design college ,
i encountered adults who actually believed in my ideas , challenged me and had lots of cups of chai with me .
and i was struck by just how wonderful it felt , and how contagious that feeling was .
i also realized i should have got infected when i was seven .
so , when i started riverside school 10 years ago it became a lab , a lab to prototype and refine a design process that could consciously infect the mind with the " i can " bug .
and i uncovered that if learning is embedded in real - world context , that if you blur the boundaries between school and life , then children go through a journey of " aware , " where they can see the change , " enable , " be changed , and then " empower , " lead the change .
and that directly increased student wellbeing .
children became more competent , and less helpless .
but this was all common sense .
so , i 'd like to show you a little glimpse of what common practice looks like at riverside .
a little background : when my grade five was learning about child rights , they were made to roll incense sticks , agarbattis , for eight hours to experience what it means to be a child laborer .
it transformed them . what you will see is their journey , and then their utter conviction that they could go out and change the world .
that 's them rolling .
and in two hours , after their backs were broke , they were changed .
and once that happened , they were out in the city convincing everybody that child labor just had to be abolished .
and look at ragav , that moment when his face changes because he 's been able to understand that he has shifted that man 's mindset .
and that ca n't happen in a classroom .
so , when ragav experienced that he went from " teacher told me , " to " i am doing it . " and that 's the " i can " mindshift .
and it is a process that can be energized and nurtured .
but we had parents who said , " okay , making our children good human beings is all very well , but what about math and science and english ?
show us the grades . "
and we did . the data was conclusive .
when children are empowered , not only do they do good , they do well , in fact very well ,
as you can see in this national benchmarking assessment taken by over 2,000 schools in india , riverside children were outperforming the top 10 schools in india in math , english and science .
so , it worked . it was now time to take it outside riverside .
so , on august 15th , independence day , 2007 , the children of riverside set out to infect ahmedabad .
now it was not about riverside school .
it was about all children . so , we were shameless .
we walked into the offices of the municipal corporation , the police , the press , businesses , and basically said , " when are you going to wake up and recognize the potential that resides in every child ?
when will you include the child in the city ?
basically , open your hearts and your minds to the child . "
so , how did the city respond ?
since 2007 every other month the city closes down the busiest streets for traffic and converts it into a playground for children and childhood .
here was a city telling its child , " you can . "
a glimpse of infection in ahmedabad .
video : [ unclear ] so , the busiest streets closed down .
we have the traffic police and municipal corporation helping us .
it gets taken over by children .
they are skating . they are doing street plays .
they are playing , all free , for all children .
atul karwal : aproch is an organization which has been doing things for kids earlier .
and we plan to extend this to other parts of the city .
kiran bir sethi : and the city will give free time .
and ahmedabad got the first child - friendly zebra crossing in the world .
geet sethi : when a city gives to the children , in the future the children will give back to the city .
kbs : and because of that , ahmedabad is known as india 's first child - friendly city .
so , you 're getting the pattern . first 200 children at riverside .
then 30,000 children in ahmedabad , and growing .
it was time now to infect india .
so , on august 15th , again , independence day , 2009 , empowered with the same process , we empowered 100,000 children to say , " i can . "
how ? we designed a simple toolkit , converted it into eight languages , and reached 32,000 schools .
we basically gave children a very simple challenge .
we said , take one idea , anything that bothers you , choose one week , and change a billion lives .
and they did . stories of change poured in from all over india , from nagaland in the east , to jhunjhunu in the west , from sikkim in the north , to krishnagiri in the south .
children were designing solutions for a diverse range of problems .
right from loneliness to filling potholes in the street to alcoholism , and 32 children who stopped 16 child marriages in rajasthan .
i mean , it was incredible .
basically again reaffirming that when adults believe in children and say , " you can , " then they will .
infection in india .
this is in rajasthan , a rural village .
child : our parents are illiterate and we want to teach them how to read and write .
kbs : first time , a rally and a street play in a rural school -- unheard of -- to tell their parents why literacy is important .
look at what their parents says .
man : this program is wonderful .
we feel so nice that our children can teach us how to read and write .
woman : i am so happy that my students did this campaign .
in the future , i will never doubt my students ' abilities .
see ? they have done it .
kbs : an inner city school in hyderabad .
girl : 581. this house is 581 ...
we have to start collecting from 555 .
kbs : girls and boys in hyderabad , going out , pretty difficult , but they did it .
woman : even though they are so young , they have done such good work .
first they have cleaned the society , then it will be hyderabad , and soon india .
woman : it was a revelation for me . it does n't strike me that they had so much inside them .
girl : thank you , ladies and gentlemen .
for our auction we have some wonderful paintings for you , for a very good cause , the money you give us will be used to buy hearing aids .
are you ready , ladies and gentlemen ? audience : yes !
girl : are you ready ? audience : yes !
girl : are you ready ? audience : yes !
kbs : so , the charter of compassion starts right here .
street plays , auctions , petitions .
i mean , they were changing lives .
it was incredible .
so , how can we still stay immune ?
how can we stay immune to that passion , that energy , that excitement ?
i know it 's obvious , but i have to end with the most powerful symbol of change , gandhiji .
70 years ago , it took one man to infect an entire nation with the power of " we can . "
so , today who is it going to take to spread the infection from 100,000 children to the 200 million children in india ?
last i heard , the preamble still said , " we , the people of india , " right ?
so , if not us , then who ?
if not now , then when ?
like i said , contagious is a good word .
thank you .
