running -- it 's basically just right , left , right , left -- yeah ?
i mean , we 've been doing it for two million years , so it 's kind of arrogant to assume that i 've got something to say that has n't been said and performed better a long time ago .
but the cool thing about running , as i 've discovered , is that something bizarre happens in this activity all the time .
case in point : a couple months ago , if you saw the new york city marathon , i guarantee you , you saw something that no one has ever seen before .
an ethiopian woman named derartu tulu turns up at the starting line .
she 's 37 years old , she has n't won a marathon of any kind in eight years , and a few months previously she almost died in childbirth .
derartu tulu was ready to hang it up and retire from the sport , but she decided she 'd go for broke and try for one last big payday in the marquee event , the new york city marathon .
except -- bad news for derartu tulu -- some other people had the same idea , including the olympic gold medalist and paula radcliffe , who is a monster , the fastest woman marathoner in history by far .
only 10 minutes off the men 's world record ,
paula radcliffe is essentially unbeatable .
that 's her competition .
the gun goes off , and she 's not even an underdog . she 's under the underdogs .
but the under - underdog hangs tough ,
and 22 miles into a 26 - mile race , there is derartu tulu up there with the lead pack .
now this is when something really bizarre happens .
paula radcliffe , the one person who is sure to snatch the big paycheck out of derartu tulu 's under - underdog hands , suddenly grabs her leg and starts to fall back .
so we all know what to do in this situation , right ?
you give her a quick crack in the teeth with your elbow and blaze for the finish line .
derartu tulu ruins the script .
instead of taking off , she falls back , and she grabs paula radcliffe , says , " come on . come with us . you can do it . "
so paula radcliffe , unfortunately , does it .
she catches up with the lead pack and is pushing toward the finish line .
but then she falls back again .
and the second time derartu tulu grabs her and tries to pull her .
and paula radcliffe at that point says , " i 'm done . go . "
so that 's a fantastic story , and we all know how it ends .
she loses the check , but she goes home with something bigger and more important .
except derartu tulu ruins the script again --
instead of losing , she blazes past the lead pack and wins , wins the new york city marathon , goes home with a big fat check .
it 's a heartwarming story , but if you drill a little bit deeper , you 've got to sort of wonder about what exactly was going on there . when you have two outliers in one organism , it 's not a coincidence .
when you have someone who is more competitive and more compassionate than anybody else in the race , again , it 's not a coincidence .
you show me a creature with webbed feet and gills ; somehow water 's involved .
someone with that kind of heart , there 's some kind of connection there .
and the answer to it , i think , can be found down in the copper canyons of mexico , where there 's a tribe , a reclusive tribe , called the tarahumara indians .
now the tarahumara are remarkable for three things .
number one is , they have been living essentially unchanged for the past 400 years .
when the conquistadors arrived in north america you had two choices : you either fight back and engage or you could take off .
the mayans and aztecs engaged , which is why there are very few mayans and aztecs .
the tarahumara had a different strategy .
they took off and hid in this labyrinthine , networking , spiderwebbing system of canyons called the copper canyons , and there they remained since the 1600s -- essentially the same way they 've always been .
the second thing remarkable about the tarahumara is , deep into old age -- 70 to 80 years old -- these guys are n't running marathons ; they 're running mega - marathons .
they 're not doing 26 miles ; they 're doing 100 , 150 miles at a time , and apparently without injury , without problems .
the last thing that 's remarkable about the tarahumara is that all the things that we 're going to be talking about today , all the things that we 're trying to come up with using all of our technology and brain power to solve -- things like heart disease and cholesterol and cancer and crime and warfare and violence and clinical depression -- all this stuff , the tarahumara do n't know what you 're talking about .
they are free from all of these modern ailments .
so what 's the connection ?
again , we 're talking about outliers --
there 's got to be some kind of cause and effect there .
well , there are teams of scientists at harvard and the university of utah that are bending their brains to try to figure out what the tarahumara have known forever .
they 're trying to solve those same kinds of mysteries .
and once again , a mystery wrapped inside of a mystery -- perhaps the key to derartu tulu and the tarahumara is wrapped in three other mysteries , which go like this : three things -- if you have the answer , come up and take the microphone , because nobody else knows the answer .
and if you know it , then you are smarter than anybody else on planet earth .
mystery number one is this : two million years ago the human brain exploded in size .
australopithecus had a tiny little pea brain .
suddenly humans show up -- homo erectus -- big , old melon - head .
to have a brain of that size , you need to have a source of condensed caloric energy .
in other words , early humans are eating dead animals -- no argument , that 's a fact .
the only problem is , the first edged weapons only appeared about 200,000 years ago .
so , somehow , for nearly two million years , we are killing animals without any weapons .
now we 're not using our strength because we are the biggest sissies in the jungle .
every other animal is stronger than we are --
they have fangs , they have claws , they have nimbleness , they have speed .
we think usain bolt is fast . usain bolt can get his ass kicked by a squirrel .
we 're not fast .
that would be an olympic event : turn a squirrel loose --
whoever catches the squirrel , you get a gold medal .
so no weapons , no speed , no strength , no fangs , no claws --
how were we killing these animals ? mystery number one .
mystery number two : women have been in the olympics for quite some time now , but one thing that 's remarkable about all women sprinters -- they all suck ; they 're terrible .
there 's not a fast woman on the planet and there never has been .
the fastest woman to ever run a mile did it in 4:15 .
i could throw a rock and hit a high school boy who can run faster than 4:15 .
for some reason you guys are just really slow .
but you get to the marathon we were just talking about -- you guys have only been allowed to run the marathon for 20 years .
because , prior to the 1980s , medical science said that if a woman tried to run 26 miles -- does anyone know what would happen if you tried to run 26 miles , why you were banned from the marathon before the 1980s ?
her uterus would be torn .
yes . you would have torn reproductive organs .
the uterus would fall out , literally fall out of the body .
now i 've been to a lot of marathons , and i 've yet to see any ...
so it 's only been 20 years that women have been allowed to run the marathon .
in that very short learning curve , you guys have gone from broken organs up to the fact that you 're only 10 minutes off the male world record .
then you go beyond 26 miles , into the distance that medical science also told us would be fatal to humans -- remember pheidippides died when he ran 26 miles -- you get to 50 and 100 miles , and suddenly it 's a different game .
you can take a runner like ann trason , or nikki kimball , or jenn shelton , you put them in a race of 50 or 100 miles against anybody in the world and it 's a coin toss who 's going to win .
i 'll give you an example .
a couple years ago , emily baer signed up for a race called the hardrock 100 , which tells you all you need to know about the race .
they give you 48 hours to finish this race .
well emily baer -- 500 runners -- she finishes in eighth place , in the top 10 , even though she stopped at all the aid stations to breastfeed her baby during the race -- and yet , beat 492 other people .
so why is it that women get stronger as distances get longer ?
the third mystery is this : at the university of utah , they started tracking finishing times for people running the marathon . and what they found is that , if you start running the marathon at age 19 , you will get progressively faster , year by year , until you reach your peak at age 27 .
and then after that , you succumb to the rigors of time .
and you 'll get slower and slower , until eventually you 're back to running the same speed you were at age 19 .
so about seven years , eight years to reach your peak , and then gradually you fall off your peak , until you go back to the starting point .
you would think it might take eight years to go back to the same speed , maybe 10 years -- no , it 's 45 years .
64 - year - old men and women are running as fast as they were at age 19 .
now i defy you to come up with any other physical activity -- and please do n't say golf -- something that actually is hard -- where geriatrics are performing as well as they did as teenagers .
so you have these three mysteries .
is there one piece in the puzzle which might wrap all these things up ?
you 've got to be really careful any time someone looks back in prehistory and tries to give you some sort of global answer , because , it being prehistory , you can say whatever the hell you want and get away with it .
but i 'll submit this to you : if you put one piece in the middle of this jigsaw puzzle , suddenly it all starts to form a coherent picture .
if you wonder , why it is the tarahumara do n't fight and do n't die of heart disease , why a poor ethiopian woman named derartu tulu can be the most compassionate and yet the most competitive , and why we somehow were able to find food without weapons , perhaps it 's because humans , as much as we like to think of ourselves as masters of the universe , actually evolved as nothing more than a pack of hunting dogs .
maybe we evolved as a hunting pack animal .
because the one advantage we have in the wilderness -- again , it 's not our fangs and our claws and our speed -- the only thing we do really , really well is sweat .
we 're really good at being sweaty and smelly .
better than any other mammal on earth , we can sweat really well .
but the advantage of that little bit of social discomfort is the fact that , when it comes to running under hot heat for long distances , we 're superb , we 're the best on the planet .
you take a horse on a hot day , and after about five or six miles , that horse has a choice .
it 's either going to breathe or it 's going to cool off , but it ai n't doing both -- we can .
so what if we evolved as hunting pack animals ?
what if the only natural advantage we had in the world was the fact that we could get together as a group , go out there on that african savannah , pick out an antelope and go out as a pack and run that thing to death ?
that 's all we could do . we could run really far on a hot day .
well if that 's true , a couple other things had to be true as well .
the key to being part of a hunting pack is the word " pack . "
if you go out by yourself , and you try to chase an antelope , i guarantee you there 's going to be two cadavers out there in the savannah .
you need a pack to pull together .
you need to have those 64- , 65 - year - olds who have been doing this for a long time to understand which antelope you 're actually trying to catch .
the herd explodes and it gathers back again .
those expert trackers have got to be part of the pack .
they ca n't be 10 miles behind .
you need to have the women and the adolescents there because the two times in your life you most benefit from animal protein is when you are a nursing mother and a developing adolescent .
it makes no sense to have the antelope over there dead and the people who want to eat it 50 miles away .
they need to be part of the pack .
you need to have those 27 - year - old studs at the peak of their powers ready to drop the kill , and you need to have those teenagers there who are learning the whole thing all involved .
the pack stays together .
another thing that has to be true about this pack : this pack cannot be really materialistic .
you ca n't be hauling all your crap around , trying to chase the antelope .
you ca n't be a pissed - off pack . you ca n't be bearing grudges ,
like , " i 'm not chasing that guy 's antelope .
he pissed me off . let him go chase his own antelope . "
the pack has got to be able to swallow its ego , be cooperative and pull together .
what you end up with , in other words , is a culture remarkably similar to the tarahumara -- a tribe that has remained unchanged since the stone age .
it 's a really compelling argument that maybe the tarahumara are doing exactly what all of us had done for two million years ,
that it 's us in modern times who have sort of gone off the path .
you know , we look at running as this kind of alien , foreign thing , this punishment you 've got to do because you ate pizza the night before .
but maybe it 's something different .
maybe we 're the ones who have taken this natural advantage we had and we spoiled it .
how do we spoil it ? well how do we spoil anything ?
we try to cash in on it .
we try to can it and package it and make it " better " and sell it to people .
and what happened was we started creating these fancy cushioned things , which can make running " better , " called running shoes .
the reason i get personally pissed - off about running shoes is because i bought a million of them and i kept getting hurt .
and i think that , if anybody in here runs -- and i just had a conversation with carol ; we talked for two minutes backstage , and she 's talking about plantar fasciitis .
you talk to a runner , i guarantee , within 30 seconds , the conversation turns to injury .
so if humans evolved as runners , if that 's our one natural advantage , why are we so bad at it ? why do we keep getting hurt ?
curious thing about running and running injuries is that the running injury is new to our time .
if you read folklore and mythology , any kind of myths , any kind of tall tales , running is always associated with freedom and vitality and youthfulness and eternal vigor .
it 's only in our lifetime that running has become associated with fear and pain .
geronimo used to say that , " my only friends are my legs . i only trust my legs . "
that 's because an apache triathlon used to be you 'd run 50 miles across the desert , engage in hand - to - hand combat , steal a bunch of horses and slap leather for home .
geronimo was never saying , " ah , you know something , my achilles -- i 'm tapering . i got to take this week off , " or " i need to cross - train .
i did n't do yoga . i 'm not ready . "
humans ran and ran all the time .
we are here today . we have our digital technology .
all of our science comes from the fact that our ancestors were able to do something extraordinary every day , which was just rely on their naked feet and legs to run long distances .
so how do we get back to that again ?
well , i would submit to you the first thing is get rid of all packaging , all the sales , all the marketing . get rid of all the stinking running shoes .
stop focusing on urban marathons , which , if you do four hours , you suck .
if you do 3:59:59 , you 're awesome , because you qualified for another race .
we need to get back to that sense of playfulness and joyfulness and , i would say , nakedness , that has made the tarahumara one of the healthiest and serene cultures in our time .
so what 's the benefit ? so what ?
so you burn off the haagen - dazs from the night before ?
but maybe there 's another benefit there as well .
without getting a little too extreme about this , imagine a world where everybody could go out their door and engage in the kind of exercise that 's going to make them more relaxed , more serene , more healthy , burn off stress -- where you do n't come back into your office a raging maniac anymore , where you do n't go back home with a lot of stress on top of you again .
maybe there 's something between what we are today and what the tarahumara have always been .
i do n't say let 's go back to the copper canyons and live on corn and maize , which is the tarahumara 's preferred diet , but maybe there 's somewhere in between .
and if we find that thing , maybe there is a big fat nobel prize out there .
because if somebody could find a way to restore that natural ability that we all enjoyed for most of our existence , up until the 1970s or so , the benefits , social and physical and political and mental , could be astounding .
so what i 've been seeing today is there is a growing subculture of barefoot runners , people who got rid of their shoes .
and what they have found uniformly is you get rid of the shoes , you get rid of the stress , you get rid of the injuries and the ailments .
and what you find is something the tarahumara have known for a very long time , that this can be a whole lot of fun .
i 've experienced it personally myself .
i was injured all my life , and then in my early 40s i got rid of my shoes and my running ailments have gone away too .
so hopefully it 's something we can all benefit from .
and i appreciate you guys listening to this story . thanks very much .
