[ shit ] this is arguably the back end of the design of animals .
but the reason i put this up here is because when i was in africa last year , my wife and i were driving around , we had this wonderful guide , who showed us something that surprised both of us , and it was very revealing in terms of the fascination that comes with the design of animals .
it turns out that in about the 1880s , the missionaries came to africa to spread the word of christianity , to teach english to the natives .
and they brought blackboards and chalk .
and i 'd like you to imagine that that 's a blackboard , and i just used some chalk on there .
and they brought quite a bit of this stuff .
but over the years , the blackboards were fine , but they ran out of chalk .
and this is a real crisis for them .
and that 's where the hyena comes in .
the hyena is probably the most perfectly designed scavenging animal in the world .
it strip - mines carcasses , and it has amazing teeth , because it enables the hyena to essentially eat bones .
now , the end product of that action is up on the board here .
and what the missionaries would do is , they 'd walk around and they 'd pick up hyena shit .
and the incredible thing about hyena shit is , it makes great chalk .
now , that 's not what i 'm here to talk about , but it is a fascinating aspect of animal design .
what i 'm here to talk about is the camel .
when i started talking to richard about what i was going to speak about , i had recently come back from jordan , where i had an amazing experience with a camel .
and we were in the desert -- richard wurman : that 's the end of this talk !
keith bellows : yeah , yeah .
we were in the desert , in wadi rum , in a small jeep .
there were four of us -- two bedouin drivers -- and you can just imagine , this expanse is an ocean of sand , 105 degrees , one water bottle .
and we were driving in what they told us was their very , very best jeep . did n't look like it to me .
and as we started to go through the desert , the jeep broke down .
the guys got out , they put the hood up , they started working under the hood , got it going again . about a hundred yards , it broke down .
this went on about six or seven times , and we were getting more and more alarmed , and we were also getting deeper and deeper into the desert .
and eventually , our worst nightmare happened : they flooded the engine .
and they said , " ah , no problem ! we just get out and walk . "
and we said , " we get out and walk ? "
one water bottle -- remember , guys -- four people .
and they said , " yeah , yeah , we 'll walk . we 'll find some camels . "
so we got out and walked , and sure enough , about half a mile , we came over the crest of this hill , and there was a huge gathering of bedouin with their camels .
the guy went up and started dickering , and 10 dollars later , we had four camels .
they went down like elevators ; we got on them . they went back up , and the bedouin -- each bedouin , four of them -- got behind each of the camels with a little whip .
and they started slashing away at the back of the camels , and they started galloping .
and if you 've ever been on a camel , it is a very , very uncomfortable ride .
there 's also one other aspect about these camels .
about every 10 steps , they lean back and try to take a chunk out of your leg .
so we kept on going , and this camel kept on trying to take a chunk out of my leg .
and eventually , three miles later , we arrived at our destination , where a jeep was supposed to meet us .
and the camels come down again like elevators , we sort of clumsily get off , and they -- obviously -- try to take another chunk out of my leg .
and i 've developed a very wonderful relationship with this creature by this point , and i 've realized that this is a mean son of a bitch .
and much meaner , by the way , than the bedouin who greeted me and tried to sell me one of his 26 daughters to take back to the states .
so as we talked , richard and i , i said , " you know , maybe i should bring a camel .
i think the camel is the best designed animal in the world . "
and he kind of went , " nah . i do n't think we want to be bringing a camel . "
and you should be really glad we decided not to bring the camel .
so i did the next best thing .
i went to the washington zoo . richard said , " i want you to get up close and personal with this camel .
i want you to inspect its mouth , look at its teeth .
go underneath it . go above it . go around it .
pull its tail up ; take a look in there .
i want you to get as close to that camel as you possibly can . "
so , i got a national geographic film crew . we went down there , and i took one look at this camel .
it is a 2,000 pound creature who is in rut .
now , if you 've ever seen a 2,000 pound camel in a rut , it is a scary , scary thing to behold .
and if richard thought i was getting in the ring with that camel , someone was smoking bedouin high grade .
so we got as close to it as possible , and i 'm going to share this -- chris , if you want to roll this film -- and then i 'm going to show you a little bit more about the design of camels .
do you want to roll the film ?
hello . this is keith bellows with the national geographic camel investigation unit .
i 'm here to look at the ultimate desert machine .
and you 'll note i started chewing gum because i was around this camel all day .
senior keeper : that 's it , that 's it , ok . no ! see , now he 's getting a little overexcited .
so we 'll need to be very careful around him . do n't let him get you .
now , you can see copious amounts of saliva in there . [ unclear ]
i call myself the unstable stable boy .
their nose -- you can see his nose is flared right now . when they 're in rut -- they 're similar to seals in the way , like , a seal has to open its nose to breathe .
and they 're similar . they have to kind of consciously open their nose .
ears ? they are small . but they have excellent hearing .
but not a big -- for instance , in zebras , they have a huge ear that 's very mobile , so they can actually turn them both around .
and they use them in the same way we use our binocular vision .
they use them to pinpoint sound .
the desert 's extremely windy as well as being very cold .
so not only do they have the very long eyelashes , but there 's the secondary -- i guess you 'd call it the [ unclear ] or whatever .
it 's this hair that 's above the eyes , and below it it 's longer .
most people think that the humps store water .
they do n't . they store fat .
but -- now , i 'm not a chemist , but basically what happens is the fat is oxidized by their breathing .
and that will turn it into actually usable water .
like a lot of predators , they walk on their toes .
but there 's a big , fat pad in there that squishes out .
they 're like sun shoes , but , you know , with sand .
hooves ? they do n't have traditional hooves , but they do have one , like , big nail .
you ca n't really see too clear . the fur 's kind of grown over .
but they use their tails a lot , especially in rut .
he will urinate and spin his tail to spread the urine around and make him more attractive .
i do n't know why that would be , but it works for them .
so , what the hell .
now , they will also defecate in certain areas . generally , they poop wherever they want to , but during their rut , they will defecate in perimeter areas .
i do n't know if you 've read or heard about the sub - sonic sounds from elephants -- you know what i mean , like , " br - r - r ! "
these big , big rumbling sounds . he will do the same thing .
you can actually see , right here , it will vibrate .
we weigh our animals .
unfortunately , he 's a very aggressive animal , so he 's actually destroyed some of the scales .
we had these big things that i weigh the bison on , for instance .
i 'm guessing that he -- well , he 's at least 1,600 pounds .
he 's basically a walking mulch pile .
we 're kind of like buds , but i 'm also a male as well and he 's -- kb : he sees you as competition ? senior keeper : yeah , exactly .
and it makes him very dangerous at this time of year .
do n't even think about it . do n't think about it !
but now , we 're going to meet -- out ! out !
out !
no.
out !
kb : what i did n't show you was -- you got that swinging thing going ?
well -- and you 're glad i did n't show you this .
one of the other things about the camel 's beautiful design is that its penis points backwards .
that way the camel can dip its tail in the stream , and just whacker the entire area around him .
and that 's how he really marks his territory .
now , what you also did n't see was that -- and you may have noticed in the pen beside him and , by the way , the camel 's name is suki .
in the pen beside him is jasmine .
jasmine has been his mate for some time .
but on this particular occasion , it was very , very clear that as horny as suki was , jasmine was having none of it .
and so we started thinking .
well , if poor old suki is in search of a mate , what would suki do to find the perfect mate ?
so i 'm going to show you another film .
but before i do , i just want to mention that this animal truly is a sort of the suv of the sand , the ship of the desert . it 's so vital to the inhabitants of the areas in which the camel is found -- largely mongolia and sahara -- that there are 160 words in arabic to describe the camel .
and if this is a creature that was designed by committee , it 's certainly been like no committee i 've ever been on .
so here 's what suki would do in search of a mate .
can you roll it , please ?
camel seeking camel . lusty beast desires attractive & sincere mate . i 'm seven ft. , 2,000 lbs. , with brown hair / eyes , long legs ... and i 'm very well ... hung . i 'm ted camel . the perfect desert machine . i 'm smartly designed . eyelashes that keep out sand and a third eyelash that works like a windshield wiper . a distinguished nose , with nostrils lined to filter out sand and dust , and a groove that catches moisture . amazingly full lips that allow me to eat practically anything that grows . callouses on my knees that let me kneel comfortably . leathery chest pads that beat the heat . short fur that keeps my skin cool . long legs that allow heat to escape . and my hump ? ogden nash once wrote : " the camel has a single hump ; the dromedary two , or else the other way around . i 'm never sure . are you ? " here 's a hint : bactarian , dromedary . my hump contains up to 80 lbs. of fat -- but does n't store h 2o . i 'm built to last . i 'm the go - to animal when the oasis is dry . i usually wo n't sweat until my body reaches 105 degrees f -- enough to fry an egg . i 'm able to lose 40 percent of my weight without dying . i 'll drink five to seven gallons of water a day . but go without for more than a month . i 'm powerful . able to pack up to 400 lbs. of cargo , outrun a horse and cover 26 miles on a good day . camelot . jackie o. once said that traveling by camel made riding an elephant seem like taking a jet plane . yet my large , soft feet allow me to navigate sand . i 'm a good provider , too . bedouins call the camel the gift of god . no surprise . tents and rugs are made of my hair . my dried bones are prized as a sort of ivory . my dung is burned as fuel . my milk is used for cheese . " camels are like angels , " a bedouin once said . thank you . i just want to leave you with one last thought , which is probably the most important thing to take away .
humans -- the animal -- are pretty lucky creatures because , by and large , we really do n't have to adapt to our environment ; we adapt our environment to us .
and we 've seen that repeatedly through this conference -- not just this year , but in past years .
but this creature that you 've just seen ultimately adapts , and keeps adapting and adapting .
and i think when you look at the animal kingdom , that is one of the most remarkable things .
it does n't have an environment that adapts to it ; it has to adapt to the environment .
ricky , thank you very much for having me .
rw : that 's terrific . thank you .
