we really need to put the best we have to offer within reach of our children .
if we do n't do that , we 're going to get the generation we deserve .
they 're going to learn from whatever it is they have around them .
and we , as now the elite , parents , librarians , professionals , whatever it is , a bunch of our activities are , in fact , in trying to get the best we have to offer within reach of those around us , or as broadly as we can .
i 'm going to start and end this talk with a couple things that are carved in stone .
one is what 's on the boston public library .
carved above their door is , " free to all . " it 's kind of an inspiring statement , and i 'll go back at the end of this .
i 'm a librarian , and what i 'm trying to do is bring all of the works of knowledge to as many people as want to read it .
and the idea of using technology is perfect for us .
i think we have the opportunity to one - up the greeks .
it 's not easy to one - up the greeks . but with the industriousness of the egyptians , they were able to build the library of alexandria -- the idea of a copy of every book of all the peoples of the world .
the problem was you actually had to go to alexandria to go to it .
on the other hand , if you did , then great things happened .
i think we can one - up the greeks and achieve something .
and i 'm going to try to argue only one point today : that universal access to all knowledge is within our grasp .
so if i 'm successful , then you 'll actually come away thinking , yeah , we could actually achieve the great vision of everything ever published , everything that was ever meant for distribution , available to anybody in the world that 's ever wanted to have access to it .
yes , there 's issues about how money should be distributed , and that 's still being refigured out .
but i 'd say there 's plenty of money , and there 's plenty of demand , so we can actually achieve that .
but i 'm going to go over the technological , social and sort of where are we as a whole , trying to get to that particular vision .
and the way i 'm going to try to do this is do it like the amazon.com website , the books , music , video and just go step -- media type by media type , just go and say , all right , how 're we doing on this ?
so if we start with books , you know , sort of where are we ?
well , first you have to , as an engineer , scope the problem . how big is it ?
if you wanted to put all of the published works online so that anybody could have it available , well , how big a problem is it ?
well , we do n't really know , but the largest print library in the world is the library of congress . it 's 26 million volumes , 26 million volumes .
it is , by far and away , the largest print library in the world .
and a book , if you had a book , is about a megabyte , so -- you know , if you had it in microsoft word .
so a megabyte , 26 million megabytes is 26 terabytes -- it goes mega - , giga - , tera - . 26 terabytes .
26 terabytes fits in a computer system that 's about this big , on spinning linux drives , and it costs about 60,000 dollars .
so for the cost of a house -- or around here , a garage -- you can put , you can have spinning all of the words in the library of congress .
that 's pretty neat .
then the question is , what do you get ?
you know , is it worth trying to get there ?
do you actually want it online ?
some of the first things that people do is they make book readers that allow you to search inside the books , and that 's kind of fun .
and you can download these things , and look around them in new and different ways .
and you can get at them remotely , if you happen to have a laptop .
there 's starting to be some of these sort of page turn - y interfaces that look a whole lot like books in certain ways , and you can search them , make little tabs , and it 's kind of cute -- still very book - like -- on your laptop .
but i do n't know , reading things on a laptop -- whenever i pull up my laptop , it always feels like work .
i think that 's one of the reasons why the kindle is so great .
i do n't have to feel like i 'm at work to read a kindle . it 's starting to be a little bit more specified .
but i have to say that there 's older technologies that i tend to like .
i like the physical book .
and i think we can go and use our technology to go and digitize things , put them on the net , and then download , print them and bind them , and end up with books again .
and we sort of said , well , how hard is this ?
and it turns out to not be very hard .
we actually went off to make a bookmobile .
and a bookmobile -- the size of a van with a satellite dish , a printer , binder and cutter , and kids make their own books .
it costs about three dollars to download , print and bind a normal , old book .
and they actually come out kind of nice looking .
you can actually get really good - looking books for on the order of one penny per page , sort of the parts cost for doing this .
so the idea of -- this technology actually may end up putting books back in people 's hands again .
there are some other bookmobiles running around .
this is eric eldred making books at walden pond -- thoreau 's works .
this is just before he got kicked out by the parks services , for competing with the bookstore there .
in india , they 've got another couple bookmobiles running around .
and this is the opening day at the library of alexandria , the new library of alexandria , in egypt .
it was quite popularly attended .
and kids starting to make their own books ,
and a happy kid with the first book that he 's ever owned .
so the idea of being able to use this technology to end up with paper where i can handle sort of sounds a little retro , but i think it still has its place .
and being from the silicon valley , sort of utopian sort of world , we thought , if we can make this technology work in rural uganda , we might have something .
so we actually got some funding from the world bank to try it out .
and we found in about 30 days we could go and take a couple folks from silicon valley , fly them to uganda , buy a car , set up the first internet connection at the national library of uganda , figure out what they wanted , and get a program going making books in rural uganda .
and it actually -- so technologically , it works .
what we found out of this is we did n't have the right books .
so the books were in the library . we could get it to people , if they 're digitized , but we did n't know how to quite get them digitized .
everybody thought the answer is , send things to india and china .
and so we 've tried that , and i 'll go over that in a moment .
there are some newer technologies for delivering that have happened that are actually quite exciting as well .
one is a print - on - demand machine that looks like a rube goldberg machine .
we have one of these things now . it 's completely cool .
it 's all conveyor belt , and it makes a book .
and it 's called the " espresso book machine , " and in about 10 minutes , you can press a button and make a book .
something else i 'm quite excited about in this particular domain , beyond these sort of kiosk - y things where you can get books on demand , is some of these new little screens that are coming out .
and one of my favorites in this is the $ 100 laptop .
and i do n't mean to steal any thunder here , but we 've gone and used one of these things to be an e-book reader .
so here 's one of the beta units and you can -- it actually turns out to be a really good - looking e-book reader .
and we have a quick hack that we did to try to put one of our books on it , and it turns out that 200 dots per inch means that you can put scanned books on them that look really good .
at 200 dots per inch , it 's kind of the equivalent of a 300 dot print laser printer .
we 're in good enough shape .
you actually can go and read scanned books quite easily .
so the idea of electronic books is starting to come about .
but how do you go about doing all this scanning ?
so we thought , okay , well , let 's try out this send books to india thing .
and there was a project with , funded by the national science foundation -- sent a bunch of scanners , and the american libraries were supposed to send books .
well , they did n't . they did n't want to send their books .
so we bought 100,000 books and sent them to india .
and then we learned why you do n't want to send books to india .
the lesson we learned out of this is , scan your own books .
if you really care about books , you 're going to scan them better , especially if they 're valuable books .
if they 're new books and you can just , you know , butcher them , because you could just buy another one , that 's not such a big deal in terms of doing high - quality scanning .
but do things that you love .
but the indians have been scanning a lot of their own books -- about 300,000 now -- doing very well .
the chinese did over a million , and the egyptians are about 30,000 .
but we sent -- thought , ok , if we 're going to need to do this , let 's do it in - library .
how do we go and do this , and how do we get it down so that it 's a cost point that we could afford ?
and we sort of picked the price point of 10 cents a page .
if it 's basically the cost of xeroxing to basically digitize , ocr , package it up , make it so that you could download , print and bind it -- the whole shebang -- we would have achieved something .
so we started out trying to figure out . how do we get to 10 cents ?
and we tried these robot things , and they worked pretty well -- sort of these auto - page - turning things .
if we can have mars rovers , you 'd think you could turn pages .
but it actually turns out to be pretty hard to turn pages , and the volume is n't there .
so anyway -- so we ended up making our own book scanner ,
and with two digital , high - grade , professional digital cameras , controlled museum lighting , so even if it 's a black and white book , you can go and get the proper intonation .
so you basically do a beautiful , respectful job .
this is not a fax , this is -- the idea is to do a beautiful job as you 're going through these libraries .
and we 've been able to achieve 10 cents a page if we run things in volume .
this is what it looks like at the university of toronto .
and actually , it turns out to , you know , pay a living wage .
people seem to love it .
yes , it 's a little boring , but some people kind of get into the zen of it .
and especially if it 's kind of interesting books that you care about , in languages that you can read . we actually have been able to do a pretty good job of this , at getting 10 cents a page .
so 10 cents a page , 300 pages in your average book , 30 dollars a book .
the library of congress , if you did the whole darn thing -- 26 million books -- is about 750 million dollars , right ?
but a million books , i think , actually would be a pretty good start , and that would cost 30 million dollars . that 's not that big a bill .
and what we 've been able to do is get into libraries .
we 've now got eight of these scanning centers in three countries , and libraries are up for having their books scanned . the getty here is moving their books to the ucla , which is where we have one these scanning centers , and scanning their out - of - copyright books , which is fabulous .
so we 're starting to get the institutional responsibility .
the thing we 're missing is the 10 cents .
if we can get the 10 cents , all the rest of it flows .
we 've scanned about 200,000 books .
now we 're scanning about 15,000 books a month ,
and it 's starting to gear up another factor of two from there .
so all in all , that 's going very well .
and we 're starting to move out of the just out - of - copyright into the out - of - print world .
so i think of -- we 're kind of going from the out - of - copyright , library stuff , and amazon.com is coming from the in - print world . and i think we 'll meet in the middle some place , and have the classic thing that you have , which is a publishing system and a library system working in parallel .
and so we 're starting up a program to do out - of - print works , but loaning them .
exactly what loaning means , i 'm not quite sure .
but anyway , loaning out - of - print works from the boston public library , the woods hole oceanographic institute and a few other libraries that are starting to participate in this program , to try out this model of where does a library stop and where does the bookstore take over .
so all in all , it 's possible to do this in large scale .
we 're also going back over microfilm and getting that online .
so , we can do 10 cents a page , we 're going 15,000 books a month and we 've got about 250,000 books online , counting all the other projects that are starting to add in .
so what i wanted to argue is , books are within our grasp .
the idea of taking on the whole ball of wax is not that big a deal .
yes , it costs tens of millions , low hundreds of millions , but one time shot and we 've got basically the history of printed literature online .
and then , there 's business model issues about how to try to effectively market it and get it to people .
but it is within our grasp , technologically and law - wise , at least for the out of print and out of copyright , we suggest , to be able to get the whole darn thing online .
now let 's go for audio , and i 'm going to go through these .
so how much is there ?
well , as best we can tell , there are about two to three million disks having been published -- so 78s , long - playing records and cds -- or at least that 's the largest archives of published materials we 've been able to sort of point at .
it costs about 10 dollars a piece to go and take a disk and put it online , if you 're doing things in volume .
but we 've found that the rights issues are really quite thorny .
this is a fairly heavily litigated area , so we 've found that there are niches in the music world that are n't served terribly well by the classic commercial publishing system .
and we 've been starting to make these available by going and offering shelf space on the net .
in the united states , it does n't cost you to give something away . right ?
if you give something to a charity or to the public , you get a pat on the back and a tax donation -- except on the net , where you can go broke .
if you put up a video of your garage band , and it starts getting heavily accessed , you can lose your guitars or your house .
this does n't make any sense .
so we 've offered unlimited storage , unlimited bandwidth , forever , for free , to anybody that has something to share that belongs in a library .
and we 've been getting a lot of takers . one is the rock ' n ' rollers .
the rock ' n ' rollers had a tradition of sharing , as long as nobody made any money . you could -- concert recordings , it 's not the commercial recordings , but concert recordings , started by the grateful dead .
and we get about two or three bands a day signing up .
they give permission , and we get about 40 or 50 concerts a day .
we have about 40,000 concerts , everything the grateful dead ever did , up on the net , so that people can see it and listen to this material .
so audio is possible to put up , but the rights issues are really pretty thorny .
we 've got a lot of collections now -- a couple hundred thousand items -- and it 's growing over time .
moving images : if you think of theatrical releases , there are not that many of them .
as best we can tell , there are about 150,000 to 200,000 movies ever that are really meant for a large - scale theatrical distribution . it 's just not that many .
but half of those were indian .
but anyway , it 's doable , but we 've only found about a thousand of these things that -- to be out of copyright .
so we 've digitized those and made those available .
but we 've found that there 's lots of other types of movies that have n't really seen the light of day -- archival films .
we 've found , also , a lot of political films , a lot of amateur films , all sorts of things that are basically needing a home , a permanent home .
so we 've been starting to make these available and it 's grown to be very popular .
we 're not quite a youtube . we tended towards longer - term things and also things that people can reuse and make into new movies , which has just been great fun .
television comes quite a bit larger .
we started recording 20 channels of television 24 hours a day .
it 's sort of the biggest tivo box you 've ever seen .
it 's about a petabyte , so far , of worldwide television -- russian , chinese , japanese , iraqi , al jazeera , bbc , cnn , abc , cbs , nbc -- 24 hours a day .
we only put one week up , which is mostly for cost reasons , which is the 9/11 , sort of from 9/11/2001 . for one week , what did the world see ?
cnn was saying that palestinians were dancing in the streets .
were they ? let 's look at the palestinian television and find out .
how can we have critical thinking without being able to quote
and being able to compare what happened in the past ?
and television is dreadfully unrecorded and unquotable , except by jon stewart , who does a fabulous job .
so anyway , television is , i would suggest , within our grasp .
so 15 dollars per video hour , and also about 100 dollars to 150 dollars per celluloid hour , we 're able to go and get materials online very inexpensively and have them up on the net .
and we 've got , now , a lot of these materials .
so we 've got about 100,000 pieces up there .
so books , music , video , software . there 's only 50,000 titles of it .
mostly the issues there are legal issues and breaking copy protections .
but we 've worked through some of those , but we 've still got real problems in washington .
well , we 're best known as the world wide web .
we 've been archiving the world wide web since 1996 .
we take a snapshot of every website and all of the pages on it , every two months .
and actually , it 's really been pioneered by alexa internet , which donates this collection to the internet archive .
and it 's been growing along for the last 11 years , and it 's a fantastic resource .
and we 've made a wayback machine that you can then go and see old websites kind of the way they were .
if you go and search on something -- this is google.com , the different versions of it that we have , this is what it looks like when it was an alpha release , and this is what it looked like at stanford .
so anyway , you 've got basically an idea of where things came from .
mostly , people want to see their old stuff out of this .
if there 's one thing that we want to learn from the library of alexandria version one , which is probably best known for burning , is , do n't just have one copy .
so we 've started to -- we 've made another copy of all of this and we actually put it back in the library of alexandria .
so this is a picture of the internet archive at the library of alexandria .
and we now have also another copy building up in amsterdam .
so , we should put it in the san andreas fault line in san francisco , flood zone in amsterdam and in the middle east . right , so anyway ...
so we 're hedging our bets here .
if we go and put it in a couple more places , i think we 'll be in good shape .
there 's a political and social question out of this .
is all of this , as we go digital , is it going to be public or private ?
there 's some large companies that have seen this vision , that are doing large - scale digitization , but they 're locking up the public domain .
the question is , is that the world that we really want to live in ?
what 's the role of the public versus the private as things go forward ?
how do we go and have a world where we both have libraries and publishing in the future , just as we basically benefited as we were growing up ?
so universal access to all knowledge -- i think it can be one of the greatest achievements of humankind , like the man on the moon , or the gutenberg bible , or the library of alexandria .
it could be something that we 're remembered for , for millennia , for having achieved .
and as i said before , i 'll end with something that 's carved above the door of the carnegie library . carnegie -- one of the great capitalists of this country -- carved above his legacy , " free to the people . "
thank you very much .
