there are more chinese restaurants in this country than mcdonald 's , burger king , kentucky fried chicken and wendy 's , combined -- 40,000 , actually .
chinese restaurants have played an important role in american history , as a matter of fact .
the cuban missile crisis was resolved in a chinese restaurant called yenching palace in washington , d.c. , which unfortunately is closed now , and about to be turned into walgreen 's .
and the house that john wilkes booth planned the assassination of abraham lincoln is actually also now a chinese restaurant called wok ' n roll , on h street in washington .
and it 's not completely gratuitous , because wok and roll -- chinese food and japanese foods , so it kind of works out .
and americans love their chinese food so much they 've actually brought it into space .
nasa , for example , serves thermal - stabilized sweet - and - sour pork on its shuttle menu for its astronauts . so , let me present the question to you : if our benchmark for americanness is apple pie , you should ask yourself , how often do you eat apple pie , versus how often do you eat chinese food . right ?
and if you think about it , a lot of the foods that you think of or we think of or americans think of as chinese food are barely recognizable to chinese ,
for example : beef with broccoli , egg rolls , general tso 's chicken , fortune cookies , chop suey , the take - out boxes .
for example , i took a whole bunch of fortune cookies back to china , gave them to chinese to see how they would react .
what is this ?
should i try it ?
try it !
what is it called ?
fortune cookie .
there 's a piece of paper inside !
what is this ?
you 've won a prize !
what is this ?
it 's a fortune !
tasty !
so , where are they from ?
the short answer is , actually , they 're from japan .
and in kyoto , outside , there are still small family - run bakeries that make fortune cookies , as they did over 100 years ago , 30 years before fortune cookies were introduced in the united states .
if you see them side by side , there 's yellow and brown .
theirs are actually flavored with miso and sesame paste , so they 're not as sweet as our version .
so , how did they get to the united states ?
well , the short answer is , the japanese immigrants came over , and a bunch of the bakers introduced them -- including at least one in los angeles , and one here in san francisco called benkyo - do , which is on the corner of sutter and buchanan .
they back then , actually , made fortune cookies using very much the similar kind of irons that we saw back in kyoto .
so , the interesting question is , how do you go from fortune cookies being something that is japanese to being something that is chinese ?
well , the short answer is , we locked up all the japanese during world war ii , including those that made fortune cookies , so that 's the time when the chinese moved in , kind of saw a market opportunity and took over .
so , fortune cookies : invented by the japanese , popularized by the chinese , but ultimately consumed by americans .
they are more american than anything else .
another one of my favorite dishes : general tso 's chicken -- which , by the way , in the us naval academy is called admiral tso 's chicken .
i love this dish .
the original name in my book was actually called the long march of general tso , and he has marched very far indeed , because he is sweet , he is fried , and he is chicken -- all things that americans love .
he has marched so far , actually , that the chef who originally invented the dish does n't recognize it ; he 's kind of horrified .
he 's in taiwan right now .
he 's retired , deaf and plays a lot of mahjong .
so , he -- after this i showed him , he got up , and he 's like , " mominqimiao , " which means , " this is all nonsense , "
and goes back to play his mahjong game during the afternoon .
so , another dish . one of my favorites . beef with broccoli .
broccoli is not a chinese vegetable ; in fact , it is originally an italian vegetable .
it was introduced into the united states in the 1800s , but became popularized in the 1920s and the 1930s .
in fact , the chinese had their own version of broccoli , which is called chinese broccoli , but right now , what -- they 've now discovered american broccoli , and are importing it as a , sort of , exotic delicacy .
i guarantee you , general tso never saw a stalk of broccoli in his life -- and indeed , that actually was a picture of general tso .
i went to his home town .
this is a billboard that says : " welcome to the birthplace of general tso . "
and i went looking for chicken .
finally found a cow -- and did find chicken .
believe it or not , these guys were actually crossing the road .
and -- -- i actually found a whole bunch of general tso 's relatives who are still in the little town .
this guy is now five generations removed from the general ; this guy is about seven .
showed them all the pictures of general tso chicken that i showed you , and they 're like , we do n't know this dish .
and then they 're like , is this chinese food ?
because it does n't look like chinese food to them .
but they were n't kind of surprised i traveled around the world to visit them , because in their eyes he is , after all , a famous qing dynasty military hero .
he played an important role in the taiping rebellion , which was a war started by a guy who thought he was the son of god and the baby brother of jesus christ . and caused the war that killed 20 million people -- still the deadliest civil war in the world to this day .
so , you know , i realized when i was there , general tso is kind of a lot like colonel sanders in america , in that he 's known for chicken and not war .
but in china , this guy 's actually known for war and not chicken .
but the granddaddy of all the chinese - american dishes we probably ought to talk about is chop suey , which was introduced around the turn of the 20th century .
and according to new york times , in 1904 , there was an outbreak of chinese restaurants all over town , and " the city has gone ' chop suey ' mad . "
so it took about 30 years before the americans realized that , whoa , chop suey is actually not known in china .
and as this article points out , " the average native of any city in china knows nothing of chop suey . "
you know , back then it was a way to show that you were sophisticated and cosmopolitan : if you were a guy and you wanted to impress a girl , you could take her out on a chop suey date .
i like to say chop suey 's the biggest culinary joke that one culture has ever played on another , because chop suey , if you translate into chinese , means tsap sui , which , if you translate back , means " odds and ends . "
so , these people are going around china asking for chop suey , which is sort of like a japanese guy coming here and saying , i understand you have a very popular dish in your country called " leftovers , " and it is particularly -- -- right ?
and not only that : this dish is particularly popular after that holiday you call thanksgiving .
so , why -- why and where -- did chop suey come from ?
let 's go back to mid - 1800s when the chinese first came to america .
now back then , the americans were not clamoring to eat chinese food .
in fact , they saw this people who landed at their shores as alien .
these people were n't eating dogs -- they were eating cats -- and they were n't eating cats -- they were eating rats .
in fact , the new york times , my esteemed employer , in 1883 ran an article that asked , " do chinese eat rats ? "
and not the most pc question to be asked today , but if you kind of look at the popular imagery of the time , not so outlandish .
this is actually a real advertisement for rat poison from the late 1800s , and if you see , under the word " clears " -- very small -- it says , " they must go , " which refers not only to the rats , but to the chinese in their midst , because the way that the food was perceived was that these people who ate foods different from us must be different from us .
and another way that you saw , sort of , this sort of , this antipathy towards the chinese is through documents like this .
this is actually in the library of congress ; it is a pamphlet published by samuel gompers , hero of our american labor movement , and it 's called , " some reason for chinese exclusion : meat versus rice : american manhood against asiatic coolieism : which shall survive ?
and it basically made the argument that chinese men who ate rice would necessarily bring down the standard of living for american men who ate meat .
this is one of the reasons why we must exclude them from this country
so , with sentiments like these , the chinese exclusion act was sort of passed between 1882 and 1902 , the only time in american history when a group was specifically excluded for its national origin or ethnicity .
so , in a way , because the chinese were attacked , chop suey was created as a defense mechanism .
now , who came up with the idea of chop suey ?
there 's a lot of different mysteries , a lot of different legends , but of the ones that i 've found that i thought was most interesting is this article from 1904 .
a chinese guy named lem sen shows up in chinatown , new york city , and says , i want you guys all to stop making chop suey , because i am the original creator and sole proprietor of the dish known as chop suey .
and the way that he tells it , there was a guy , there was a famous chinese diplomat that showed up , and he was told to make a dish that looked very popular and could , quote , " pass " as chinese .
and as he said -- we would never print this today -- but basically , the american man has become very rich .
lem sen , who 's this guy : i would have made this money , too , but i 've spent all this time looking for the american man who stole my recipe .
now i 've come and found him , and i want my recipe back and i want everyone to stop making chop suey ,
or pay me for the right to do the same .
so it was an early exercise of intellectual property rights .
so the thing is , this kind of idea of chinese - american food does n't exist only in america .
in fact , if you think about it , chinese food is the most pervasive food on the planet , served on all seven continents , even antarctica , because monday night is chinese food night at mcmurdo station , which is the main scientific station in antarctica .
so , you see different varieties of chinese food .
for example , there is french chinese food , where they serve salt and pepper frog legs .
there is italian chinese food , where they do n't have fortune cookies , so they serve fried gelato .
my downstairs neighbor , alessandra , was completely shocked when i told her , " dude , fried gelato is not chinese . "
she 's like , " it 's not ?
but they serve it in all the chinese restaurants in italy . "
and even the brits have their own version .
this is a dish called crispy shredded beef , which has a lot of crisp , a lot of shred , and not a lot of beef .
there is west indian chinese food , there 's jamaican chinese food , there is middle eastern chinese food , there 's mauritian chinese food .
this is a dish called magic bowl that i discovered .
there 's indian chinese food , korean chinese food , japanese chinese food , where they take the bao , the little buns , and they make them into pizza versions , and they take -- and they -- like , totally randomly they 'll take chinese noodle dishes , and they 'll just ramen - ize them .
this is , like , this is something that in the chinese version has no soup .
so , there 's peruvian chinese food , which should not be mixed with mexican chinese food , where they basically take things and make it look like fajitas .
and then -- one thing : they have things like risotto chop suey .
my personal favorite of all the restaurants i 've encountered around the world was this one in brazil , called " kung food . "
so , let 's take a step back , and kind of , understand what is to be appreciated in america .
mcdonald 's has , sort of , garnered a lot of attention , a lot of respect , for basically standardizing the menu , décor and dining experience in post - world war ii america .
but you know what ?
they actually did so through a centralized headquarters out of illinois , right ?
chinese restaurants have done largely the same thing , i would argue , with the menu and the décor -- even the restaurant name -- but without a centralized headquarters .
so , this actually became very clear to me with the march 30 , 2005 powerball drawing , where , you know , they expected , based on the number of ticket sales they had , to have three or four second - place winners -- those are the people who match five or six powerball numbers .
instead , they had 110 , and they were completely shocked .
they looked all across the country , and discovered it could n't necessarily be fraud , because it happened , you know , in different states , across different computer systems .
so whatever it was , it caused people to sort of behave in a mass synchronized way .
so , like , ok , maybe it had to do with the patterns on the little pieces of paper -- you know , like , it was a diamond , or , you know , diagonal .
it was n't that .
it was n't that , so they 're like , ok , let 's look at television , so they looked at an episode of " lost . "
now , i do n't have a tv , which makes me a freak , but very productive , and -- -- and this episode of " lost , " i understand , where the overweight guy has a lucky number which was not a lucky number , which was how long they 'd been on the island , but they looked , and the numbers did not match .
so they looked at " the young and the restless , " and it was n't that , either .
so , it was n't until the first guy shows up the next day , and they ask him , " where did you get your number from ? "
he 's like , " oh , i got it from a fortune cookie . "
this actually is a slip that one of the winners had , because the tennessee lottery security officials were like , oh , no -- like , this ca n't be true .
but it was true , and basically , of those 110 people , and 104 of them or so had gotten their number from the fortune cookie .
yeah . so , i went and started looking . i went across the country , looking for these restaurants where these people had gotten their fortune cookies from .
you know , there are a bunch of them , including lee 's china in omaha -- which is actually run by koreans , but that 's another point -- and a bunch of them named china buffet .
so , what 's interesting is that their stories were similar , but they were different .
it was lunch , it was take - out , it was sit - down , it was buffet , it was three weeks ago , it was three months ago .
but at some point , all these people had a very similar experience that converged at a fortune cookie and at a chinese restaurant , and all these chinese restaurants were serving fortune cookies , which , of course we know are n't even chinese to begin with .
so it 's kind of part of the phenomenon i called spontaneous self - organization , right , where , like in ant colonies , where little decisions made by -- on the micro - level actually have a big impact on the macro - level .
so , a good sort of contrast is chicken mcnuggets .
mcdonald 's actually spent 10 years coming out with a chicken - like product .
they did chicken pot pie , they did fried chicken , and then they finally introduced chicken mcnuggets .
and the great innovation of chicken mcnuggets was not nuggetfying them , because that 's kind of an easy concept , but the trick behind chicken mcnuggets was , they were able to remove the chicken from the bone in a cost - effective manner , which is why it took so long for other people to copy them .
it took 10 years , and then within a couple of months , it was such a hit they just introduced it and rolled it across the entire system of mcdonald 's in the country .
in contrast , we have general tso 's chicken , which actually started in new york city in the early 1970s , as i was also starting in the university in new york city in the early 1970s , so ...
and this logo !
so me , general tso 's chicken and this logo are all karmacally related .
but that dish also took about 10 years to spread across america from a random restaurant in new york city .
someone 's like , oh , god -- it 's sweet , it 's fried , it 's chicken : americans will love this .
so , what i like to say , you know , this being sort of bay area , silicon valley -- is that we think of mcdonald 's as sort of the microsoft of the dining experiences .
we can think of chinese restaurants perhaps as linux : sort of an open source thing , right , where ideas from one person can be copied and propagated across the entire system , that there can be specialized versions of chinese food , you know , depending on the region .
for example , you know , in new orleans we have cajun chinese food , where they serve sichuan alligator and sweet and sour crawfish , right ?
and in philadelphia , you have philadelphia cheesesteak roll , which looks like an egg roll on the outside , but a cheesesteak on the inside .
i was really surprised to discover that , not only in philadelphia , but also in atlanta , because what had happened was that a chinese family had moved from atlanta to -- sorry , from philadelphia to atlanta , and brought that with them .
so , the thing is , our historical lore , because of the way we like narratives , are full of vast characters such as , you know , howard schultz of starbucks and ray kroc with mcdonald 's and asa chandler with coca - cola .
but , you know , it 's very easy to overlook the smaller characters -- oops -- for example , like lem sen , who introduced chop suey , chef peng , who introduced general tso chicken , and all the japanese bakers who introduced fortune cookies .
so , the point of my presentation is to make you think twice , that those whose names are forgotten in history can often have had as much , if not more , impact on what we eat today .
so . thank you very much .
