i 'd like to dedicate this one to all the women in south africa -- those women who refused to dwindle in the midst of apartheid .
and , of course , i 'm dedicating it also to my grandmother , whom i think really played quite a lot of important roles , especially for me when i was an activist , and being harassed by the police .
you will recall that in 1976 , june 16 , the students of south africa boycotted the language of afrikaans as the medium of the oppressor , as they were sort of like really told that they must do everything in afrikaans -- biology , mathematics -- and what about our languages ?
and the students wanted to speak to the government , and police answered with bullets .
so every year , june 16 , we will commemorate all those comrades or students who died .
and i was very young then . i think i was 11 years , and i started asking questions , and that 's when my political education started .
and i joined , later on , the youth organization under the african national congress .
so as part of organizing this and whatever , this commemoration , the police will round us up as they call us leaders .
and i used to run away from home , when i know that maybe the police might be coming around the ninth or 10th of june or so .
and my grandmother one time said , " no , look , you 're not going to run away .
this is your place , you stay here . "
and indeed , the police came -- because they 'll just arrest us and put us in jail and release us whenever they feel like , after the 20th or so .
so it was on the 10th of june , and they came , and they surrounded the house , and my grandmother switched off all the lights in the house , and opened the kitchen door .
and she said to them , " vusi 's here , and you 're not going to take him tonight .
i 'm tired of you having to come here , harassing us , while your children are sleeping peacefully in your homes .
he is here , and you 're not going to take him .
i 've got a bowl full of boiling water -- the first one who comes in here , gets it . "
and they left .
