chris anderson : welcome to ted .
richard branson : thank you very much . the first ted has been great .
ca : have you met anyone interesting ?
rb : well , the nice thing about ted is everybody 's interesting .
i was very glad to see goldie hawn , because i had an apology to make to her .
i 'd had dinner with her about two years ago and i 'd -- she had this big wedding ring and i put it on my finger and i could n't get it off .
and i went home to my wife that night and she wanted to know why i had another woman 's big , massive , big wedding ring on my finger .
and , anyway , the next morning we had to go along to the jeweler and get it cut off .
so -- -- so apologies to goldie .
ca : that 's pretty good .
so , we 're going to put up some slides of some of your companies here .
you 've started one or two in your time .
so , you know , virgin atlantic , virgin records -- i guess it all started with a magazine called student .
and then , yes , all these other ones as well . i mean , how do you do this ?
rb : i read all these sort of ted instructions : you must not talk about your own business , and this , and now you ask me .
so i suppose you 're not going to be able to kick me off the stage , since you asked the question .
ca : it depends what the answer is though .
rb : no , i mean , i think i learned early on that if you can run one company , you can really run any companies .
i mean , companies are all about finding the right people , inspiring those people , you know , drawing out the best in people .
and i just love learning and i 'm incredibly inquisitive and i love taking on , you know , the status quo and trying to turn it upside down .
so i 've seen life as one long learning process .
and if i see -- you know , if i fly on somebody else 's airline and find the experience is not a pleasant one , which it was n't , 21 years ago , then i 'd think , well , you know , maybe i can create the kind of airline that i 'd like to fly on .
and so , you know , so got one secondhand 747 from boeing and gave it a go .
ca : well , that was a bizarre thing , because you made this move that a lot of people advised you was crazy .
and in fact , in a way , it almost took down your empire at one point .
i had a conversation with one of the investment bankers who , at the time when you basically sold virgin records and invested heavily in virgin atlantic , and his view was that you were trading , you know , the world 's fourth biggest record company for the twenty - fifth biggest airline and that you were out of your mind .
why did you do that ?
rb : well , i think that there 's a very thin dividing line between success and failure .
and i think if you start a business without financial backing , you 're likely to go the wrong side of that dividing line .
we had -- we were being attacked by british airways .
they were trying to put our airline out of business , and they launched what 's become known as the dirty tricks campaign .
and i realized that the whole empire was likely to come crashing down unless i chipped in a chip .
and in order to protect the jobs of the people who worked for the airline , and protect the jobs of the people who worked for the record company , i had to sell the family jewelry to protect the airline .
ca : post - napster , you 're looking like a bit of a genius , actually , for that as well .
rb : yeah , as it turned out , it proved to be the right move .
but , yeah , it was sad at the time , but we moved on .
ca : now , you use the virgin brand a lot and it seems like you 're getting synergy from one thing to the other .
what does the brand stand for in your head ?
rb : well , i like to think it stands for quality , that you know , if somebody comes across a virgin company , they -- ca : they are quality , richard . come on now , everyone says quality . spirit ?
rb : no , but i was going to move on this .
we have a lot of fun and i think the people who work for it enjoy it .
as i say , we go in and shake up other industries , and i think , you know , we do it differently and i think that industries are not quite the same as a result of virgin attacking the market .
ca : i mean , there are a few launches you 've done where the brand maybe has n't worked quite as well .
i mean , virgin brides -- what happened there ?
rb : we could n't find any customers .
ca : i was actually also curious why -- i think you missed an opportunity with your condoms launch . you called it mates .
i mean , could n't you have used the virgin brand for that as well ?
ai n't virgin no longer , or something .
rb : again , we may have had problems finding customers .
i mean , we had -- often , when you launch a company and you get customer complaints , you know , you can deal with them .
but about three months after the launch of the condom company , i had a letter , a complaint , and i sat down and wrote a long letter back to this lady apologizing profusely .
but obviously , there was n't a lot i could do about it .
and then six months later , or nine months after the problem had taken , i got this delightful letter with a picture of the baby asking if i 'd be godfather , which i became .
so , it all worked out well .
ca : really ? you should have brought a picture . that 's wonderful .
rb : i should have .
ca : so , just help us with some of the numbers .
i mean , what are the numbers on this ?
i mean , how big is the group overall ?
how much -- what 's the total revenue ?
rb : it 's about 25 billion dollars now , in total .
ca : and how many employees ?
rb : about 55,000 .
ca : so , you 've been photographed in various ways at various times and never worrying about putting your dignity on the line or anything like that .
what was that ? was that real ?
rb : yeah . we were launching a megastore in los angeles , i think .
no , i mean , i think -- ca : but is that your hair ?
rb : no.
ca : what was that one ?
rb : dropping in for tea .
ca : ok .
rb : ah , that was quite fun . that was a wonderful car - boat in which -- ca : oh , that car that we -- actually we -- it was a tedster event there , i think .
is that -- could you still pause on that one actually , for a minute ?
rb : it 's a tough job , is n't it ?
ca : i mean , it is a tough job .
when i first came to america , i used to try this with employees as well and they kind of -- they have these different rules over here , it 's very strange .
rb : i know , i have -- the lawyers say you must n't do things like that , but -- ca : i mean , speaking of which , tell us about -- rb : " pammy " we launched , you know -- mistakenly thought we could take on coca - cola , and we launched a cola bottle called " the pammy " and it was shaped a bit like pamela anderson .
but the trouble is , it kept on tipping over , but -- ca : designed by philippe starck perhaps ?
rb : of course .
ca : so , we 'll just run a couple more pictures here . virgin brides . very nice .
and , ok , so stop there . this was -- you had some award i think ?
rb : yeah , well , 25 years earlier , we 'd launched the sex pistols ' " god save the queen , " and i 'd certainly never expected that 25 years later -- that she 'd actually knight us .
but somehow , she must have had a forgetful memory , i think .
ca : well , god saved her and you got your just reward .
do you like to be called sir richard , or how ?
rb : nobody 's ever called me sir richard .
occasionally in america , i hear people saying sir richard and think there 's some shakespearean play taking place .
but nowhere else anyway .
ca : ok . so can you use your knighthood for anything or is it just ...
rb : no. i suppose if you 're having problems getting a booking in a restaurant or something , that might be worth using it .
ca : you know , it 's not richard branson . it 's sir richard branson .
rb : i 'll go get the secretary to use it .
ca : ok . so let 's look at the space thing .
i think , with us , we 've got a video that shows what you 're up to , and virgin galactic up in the air .
so that 's the bert rutan designed spaceship ?
rb : yeah , it 'll be ready in -- well , ready in 12 months and then we do 12 months extensive testing .
and then 24 months from now , people will be able to take a ride into space .
ca : so this interior is philippe starcke designed ?
rb : philippe has done the -- yeah , quite a bit of it : the logos and he 's building the space station in new mexico .
and basically , he 's just taken an eye and the space station will be one giant eye , so when you 're in space , you ought to be able to see this massive eye looking up at you .
and when you land , you 'll be able to go back into this giant eye .
but he 's an absolute genius when it comes to design .
ca : but you did n't have him design the engine ?
rb : philippe is quite erratic , so i think that he would n't be the best person to design the engine , no.
ca : he gave a wonderful talk here two days ago .
rb : yeah ? no , he is a -- ca : well , some people found it wonderful , some people found it completely bizarre .
but , i personally found it wonderful .
rb : he 's a wonderful enthusiast , which is why i love him . but ...
ca : so , now , you 've always had this exploration bug in you .
have you ever regretted that ?
rb : many times .
i mean , i think with the ballooning and boating expeditions we 've done in the past .
well , i got pulled out of the sea i think six times by helicopters , so -- and each time , i did n't expect to come home to tell the tale .
so in those moments , you certainly wonder what you 're doing up there or -- ca : what was the closest you got to -- when did you think , this is it , i might be on my way out ?
rb : well , i think the balloon adventures were -- each one was , each one , actually , i think we came close .
and , i mean , first of all we -- nobody had actually crossed the atlantic in a hot air balloon before , so we had to build a hot air balloon that was capable of flying in the jet stream , and we were n't quite sure , when a balloon actually got into the jet stream , whether it would actually survive the 200 , 220 miles an hour winds that you can find up there .
and so , just the initial lift off from sugarloaf to cross the atlantic , as we were pushing into the jet stream , this enormous balloon -- the top of the balloon ended up going at a couple of hundred miles an hour , the capsule that we were in at the bottom was going at maybe two miles an hour , and it just took off .
and it was like holding onto a thousand horses .
and we were just crossing every finger , praying that the balloon would hold together , which , fortunately , it did .
but the ends of all those balloon trips were , you know -- something seemed to go wrong every time , and on that particular occasion , the more experienced balloonist who was with me jumped , and left me holding on for dear life .
ca : did he tell you to jump , or he just said , " i 'm out of here ! " and ...
rb : no , he told me jump , but once his weight had gone , the balloon just shot up to 12,000 feet and i ...
ca : and you inspired an ian mcewan novel i think with that .
rb : yeah . no , i put on my oxygen mask and stood on top of the balloon , with my parachute , looking at the swirling clouds below , trying to pluck up my courage to jump into the north sea , which -- and it was a very , very , very lonely few moments .
but , anyway , we managed to survive it .
ca : did you jump ? or it came down in the end ?
rb : well , i knew i had about half an hour 's fuel left , and i also knew that the chances were that if i jumped , i would only have a couple of minutes of life left .
so i climbed back into the capsule and just desperately tried to make sure that i was making the right decision .
and wrote some notes to my family . and then climbed back up again , looked down at those clouds again , climbed back into the capsule again .
and then finally , just thought , there 's a better way .
i 've got , you know , this enormous balloon above me , it 's the biggest parachute ever , why not use it ?
and so i managed to fly the balloon down through the clouds , and about 50 feet , before i hit the sea , threw myself over .
and the balloon hit the sea and went shooting back up to 10,000 feet without me .
but it was a wonderful feeling being in that water and -- ca : what did you write to your family ?
rb : just what you would do in a situation like that : just i love you very much . and i 'd already written them a letter before going on this trip , which -- just in case anything had happened .
but fortunately , they never had to use it .
ca : your companies have had incredible pr value out of these heroics .
the years -- and until i stopped looking at the polls , you were sort of regarded as this great hero in the u.k. and elsewhere .
and cynics might say , you know , this is just a smart business guy doing what it takes to execute his particular style of marketing .
how much was the pr value part of this ?
rb : well , of course , the pr experts said that as an airline owner , the last thing you should be doing is heading off in balloons and boats , and crashing into the seas .
ca : they have a point , richard .
rb : in fact , i think our airline took a full page ad at the time saying , you know , come on , richard , there are better ways of crossing the atlantic .
ca : to do all this , you must have been a genius from the get - go , right ?
rb : well , i wo n't contradict that .
ca : ok , this is n't exactly hardball . ok .
did n't -- were n't you just terrible at school ?
rb : i was dyslexic . i had no understanding of schoolwork whatsoever .
i certainly would have failed iq tests .
and it was one of the reasons i left school when i was 15 years old .
and if i -- if i 'm not interested in something , i do n't grasp it .
as somebody who 's dyslexic , you also have some quite bizarre situations .
i mean , for instance , i 've had to -- you know , i 've been running the largest group of private companies in europe , but have n't been able to know the difference between net and gross .
and so the board meetings have been fascinating .
and so , it 's like , good news or bad news ?
and generally , the people would say , oh , well that 's bad news .
ca : but just to clarify , the 25 billion dollars is gross , right ? that 's gross ?
rb : well , i hope it 's net actually , having -- -- i 've got it right .
ca : no , trust me , it 's gross .
rb : so , when i turned 50 , somebody took me outside the boardroom and said , " look richard , here 's a -- let me draw on a diagram .
here 's a net in the sea , and the fish have been pulled from the sea into this net .
and that 's the profits you 've got left over in this little net , everything else is eaten . "
and i finally worked it all out .
ca : but , i mean , at school -- so as well as being , you know , doing pretty miserably academically , but you were also the captain of the cricket and football teams .
so you were kind of a -- you were a natural leader , but just a bit of a ... were you a rebel then , or how would you ...
rb : yeah , i think i was a bit of a maverick and -- but i ... and i was , yeah , i was fortunately good at sport , and so at least i had something to excel at , at school .
ca : and some bizarre things happened just earlier in your life .
i mean , there 's the story about your mother allegedly dumping you in a field , aged four , and saying " ok , walk home . "
did this really happen ?
rb : she was , you know , she felt that we needed to stand on our own two feet from an early age .
so she did things to us , which now she 'd be arrested for , such as pushing us out of the car , and telling us to find our own way to granny 's , about five miles before we actually got there .
and making us go on wonderful , long bike rides .
and we were never allowed to watch television and the like .
ca : but is there a risk here ?
i mean , there 's a lot of people in the room who are wealthy , and they 've got kids , and we 've got this dilemma about how you bring them up .
do you look at the current generation of kids coming up and think they 're too coddled , they do n't know what they 've got , we 're going to raise a generation of privileged ...
rb : no , i think if you 're bringing up kids , you just want to smother them with love and praise and enthusiasm .
so i do n't think you can mollycoddle your kids too much really .
ca : you did n't turn out too bad , i have to say , i 'm ...
your headmaster said to you -- i mean he found you kind of an enigma at your school -- he said , you 're either going to be a millionaire or go to prison , and i 'm not sure which .
which of those happened first ?
rb : well , i 've done both . i think i went to prison first .
i was actually prosecuted under two quite ancient acts in the u.k.
i was prosecuted under the 1889 venereal diseases act and the 1916 indecent advertisements act .
on the first occasion , for mentioning the word venereal disease in public , which -- we had a center where we would help young people who had problems .
and one of the problems young people have is venereal disease .
and there 's an ancient law that says you ca n't actually mention the word venereal disease or print it in public .
so the police knocked on the door , and told us they were going to arrest us if we carried on mentioning the word venereal disease .
we changed it to social diseases and people came along with acne and spots , but nobody came with vd any more .
so , we put it back to vd and promptly got arrested .
and then subsequently , " never mind the bollocks , here 's the sex pistols , " the word bollocks , the police decided was a rude word and so we were arrested for using the word bollocks on the sex pistols ' album .
and john mortimer , the playwright , defended us .
and he asked if i could find a linguistics expert to come up with a different definition of the word bollocks .
and so i rang up nottingham university , and i asked to talk to the professor of linguistics .
and he said , " look , bollocks is not a -- has nothing to do with balls whatsoever .
it 's actually a nickname given to priests in the eighteenth century . "
and he went , " furthermore , i 'm a priest myself . "
and so i said , " would you mind coming to the court ? "
and he said he 'd be delighted . and i said -- and he said , " would you like me to wear my dog collar ? "
and i said , " yes , definitely . please . "
ca : that 's great .
rb : so our key witness argued that it was actually " never mind the priest , here 's the sex pistols . "
and the judge found us -- reluctantly found us not guilty , so ...
ca : that is outrageous .
so seriously , is there a dark side ?
a lot of people would say there 's no way that someone could put together this incredible collection of businesses without knifing a few people in the back , you know , doing some ugly things .
you 've been accused of being ruthless .
there was a nasty biography written about you by someone .
is any of it true ? is there an element of truth in it ?
rb : i do n't actually think that the stereotype of a businessperson treading all over people to get to the top , generally speaking , works .
i think if you treat people well , people will come back and come back for more .
and i think all you have in life is your reputation and it 's a very small world .
and i actually think that the best way of becoming a successful business leader is dealing with people fairly and well , and i like to think that 's how we run virgin .
ca : and what about the people who love you and who see you spending -- you keep getting caught up in these new projects , but it almost feels like you 're addicted to launching new stuff .
you get excited by an idea and , kapow !
i mean , do you think about life balance ?
how do your family feel about each time you step into something big and new ?
rb : i also believe that being a father 's incredibly important , so from the time the kids were very young , you know , when they go on holiday , i go on holiday with them .
and so we spend a very good sort of three months away together .
yes , i 'll , you know , be in touch . we 're very lucky , we have this tiny little island in the caribbean and we can -- so i can take them there and we can bring friends , and we can play together , but i can also keep in touch with what 's going on .
ca : you started talking in recent years about this term capitalist philanthropy .
what is that ?
rb : capitalism has been proven to be a system that works .
you know , the alternative , communism , has not worked .
but the problem with capitalism is extreme wealth ends up in the hands of a few people , and therefore extreme responsibility , i think , goes with that wealth .
and i think it 's important that the individuals , who are in that fortunate position , do not end up competing for bigger and bigger boats , and bigger and bigger cars , but , you know , use that money to either create new jobs or to tackle issues around the world .
ca : and what are the issues that you worry about most , care most about , want to turn your resources toward ?
rb : well , there 's -- i mean there 's a lot of issues .
i mean global warming certainly is a massive threat to mankind and we are putting a lot of time and energy into , a , trying to come up with alternative fuels and , b , you know , we just launched this prize , which is really a prize in case we do n't get an answer on alternative fuels , in case we do n't actually manage to get the carbon emissions cut down quickly , and in case we go through the tipping point .
we need to try to encourage people to come up with a way of extracting carbon out of the earth 's atmosphere .
and we just -- you know , there were n't really people working on that before , so we wanted people to try to -- all the best brains in the world to start thinking about that , and also to try to extract the methane out of the earth 's atmosphere as well .
and actually , we 've had about 15,000 people fill in the forms saying they want to give it a go .
and so we only need one , so we 're hopeful .
ca : and you 're also working in africa on a couple of projects ?
rb : yes , i mean , we 've got -- we 're setting up something called the war room , which is maybe the wrong word .
we 're trying to -- maybe we 'll change it -- but anyway , it 's a war room to try to coordinate all the attack that 's going on in africa , all the different social problems in africa , and try to look at best practices .
so , for instance , there 's a doctor in africa that 's found that if you give a mother antiretroviral drugs at 24 weeks , when she 's pregnant , that the baby will not have hiv when it 's born .
and so disseminating that information to around the rest of africa is important .
ca : the war room sounds , it sounds powerful and dramatic .
and is there a risk that the kind of the business heroes of the west get so excited about -- i mean , they 're used to having an idea , getting stuff done , and they believe profoundly in their ability to make a difference in the world .
is there a risk that we go to places like africa and say , we 've got to fix this problem and we can do it , i 've got all these billions of dollars , you know , da , da , da -- here 's the big idea . and kind of take a much more complex situation and actually end up making a mess of it . do you worry about that ?
rb : well , first of all , on this particular situation , we 're actually -- we 're working with the government on it .
i mean , thabo mbeki 's had his problems with accepting hiv and aids are related , but this is a way , i think , of him tackling this problem and instead of the world criticizing him , it 's a way of working with him , with his government .
it 's important that if people do go to africa and do try to help , they do n't just go in there and then leave after a few years .
it 's got to be consistent .
but i think business leaders can bring their entrepreneurial know - how and help governments approach things slightly differently .
for instance , we 're setting up clinics in africa where we 're going to be giving free antiretroviral drugs , free tb treatment and free malaria treatment .
but we 're also trying to make them self - sustaining clinics , so that people pay for some other aspects .
ca : i mean a lot of cynics say about someone like yourself , or bill gates , or whatever , that this is really being -- it 's almost driven by some sort of desire again , you know , for the right image , for guilt avoidance and not like a real philanthropic instinct .
what would you say to them ?
rb : well , i think that everybody -- people do things for a whole variety of different reasons and i think that , you know , when i 'm on me deathbed , i will want to feel that i 've made a difference to other people 's lives .
and that may be a selfish thing to think , but it 's the way i 've been brought up .
i think if i 'm in a position to radically change other people 's lives for the better , i should do so .
ca : how old are you ?
rb : i 'm 56 .
ca : i mean , the psychologist erik erikson says that -- as i understand him and i 'm a total amateur -- but that during 30s , 40s people are driven by this desire to grow and that 's where they get their fulfillment .
50s , 60s , the mode of operation shifts more to the quest for wisdom and a search for legacy .
i mean , it seems like you 're still a little bit in the growth phases , you 're still doing these incredible new plans .
how much do you think about legacy , and what would you like your legacy to be ?
rb : i do n't think i think too much about legacy .
i mean , i like to -- you know , my grandmother lived to 101 , so hopefully i 've got another 30 or 40 years to go .
no , i just want to live life to its full .
you know , if i can make a difference , i hope to be able to make a difference .
and i think one of the positive things at the moment is you 've got sergey and larry from google , for instance , who are good friends .
and , thank god , you 've got two people who genuinely care about the world and with that kind of wealth .
if they had that kind of wealth and they did n't care about the world , it would be very worrying .
and you know they 're going to make a hell of a difference to the world .
and i think it 's important that people in that kind of position do make a difference .
ca : well , richard , when i was starting off in business , i knew nothing about it and i also was sort of -- i thought that business people were supposed to just be ruthless and that that was the only way you could have a chance of succeeding .
and you actually did inspire me . i looked at you , i thought , well , he 's made it . maybe there is a different way .
so i would like to thank you for that inspiration , and for coming to ted today . thank you .
thank you so much .
