those of us who believe in heaven have some sort of idea of what heaven would be .
and in my idea , heaven is satisfied curiosity .
i think of heaven as a really comfortable cloud where i can just lie down with my belly down , like i was watching tv when i was a child , and my elbows up .
and i can basically look everywhere i want , see every movie i 've always wanted to see .
and in the same kind of trance that you can feel sometimes in the subway in new york when you 're reading , there 's something really soothing and easy .
well , the funny thing is that i already have that kind of life , in a way , because i discovered ...
it took me a while to understand it , but when i discovered around 24 years of age that i was much more comfortable with objects than with people , i finally decided to really embrace this passion .
and i basically live my life in sort of a trance , and i look around and everything i see is just the beginning of a long story .
just to give you an example : this is the exhibition , humble masterpieces , as it was at moma in 2004 .
we were in queens , we were building the big , big , big , big building in midtown , so we were in the small , small , small boondocks .
that was one of the funnest moments of my career .
but it 's not only that .
the typeface -- the typeface is helvetica ; it 's its 50th anniversary this year .
and so i start thinking -- max miedinger and all those swiss designers together , trying to outdo akzidenz - grotesk , and come up with a new sans - serif typeface -- and the movie starts playing in my head already .
and of course , you can imagine , with humble masterpieces it was the same thing multiplied by a hundred .
and i do hope , by the way , that the real goal of the exhibition is going to have the same effect on you .
the exhibition was meant to be a way to have children think of doing ...
you know when they do homeworks at home ?
instead of having a tray with two peas , i was hoping that they would go into the kitchen cabinet or the mother 's handbag and do their museum - quality design collection on a tray .
so , everybody 's always suggesting new humble masterpieces , and at moma we put out some books just for people to suggest their own humble masterpieces .
and when you do that , usually you get 80 percent porn and 20 percent real suggestions , and instead it was all -- almost -- all good suggestions .
and a lot of nationalism came in .
for instance , i did n't know that the spaniards invented the mop , but they were very proud so every spaniard said " la frego . " and italians did the pizza .
and i wanted to show you , also , the suggestions from kentucky are pretty good -- they had moonshine , laundry detergents and liquid nails .
and i keep it going , and i just got , also , this suggestion from milan : it 's our traffic divider , which we call " panettone , " and it 's painted ; it 's these beautiful concrete things that you use around milan to define all the lanes of traffic .
so , think of your own , send them on if you want to -- they 're always welcome .
but an exhibition like that made me understand even more what i 've been thinking of for 13 years ever since i got to moma .
i 'm italian . in italy , design is normal .
different parts of the world have a knack for different things .
i was just recently in argentina and in uruguay , and the default way of building homes in the country is a beautiful modernism that you do n't see elsewhere , but the contemporary art was terrible .
in italy , in milan especially , contemporary art really does n't have that much of a place .
but design -- oh , my god .
what you find at the store at the corner , without going to any kind of fancy store , is the kind of refined design that makes everybody think that we are all so sophisticated .
it 's just what you find at the store .
and new york has another kind of knack for contemporary art .
i 'm always amazed -- three - year - olds know who richard serra is and take you to the galleries .
but design , for some reason , is still misunderstood for decoration .
it 's really interesting : what many people think when i say the word " design " is they think of this kind of overdesigned -- in this case , it 's overdesigned on purpose , but -- decoration , interior decoration .
they think of somebody choosing fabrics .
design can be that , of course , but it can also be this .
it can be a school of design in jerusalem that tries to find a better way to design gas masks for people , because , as you know , israel deploys one gas mask per person including babies .
so , what these designers do is they find a way to lower the neckline , so that instead of being completely strangled , a teenager can also sip a coke .
they tried to make a toddler 's gas mask in such a way that the toddler can be held by the parent because proximity of the body is so important .
and then they make a little tent for the baby .
however cruel , however ruthless you can think this is it 's a great design , and it is miles away from the fancy furniture , but still , it 's part of my same field of passion .
what i 've been doing at moma since the beginning is to try to harness the power of moma because it 's great to work there . you really have power in that people usually tend to know about your exhibition or see the exhibitions , and that is power because in a design museum i would n't have as many visitors .
i 'm very well aware that 80 percent of my public is there to see picasso and matisse , and then they stumble upon my show and i keep them there .
but what i 've been trying to do is something that the curators at moma in my department have been doing ever since the museum was founded in 1929 , which is to try and see what 's going on in the world and try to use that authority in order to make things better .
there have been many episodes , and actually eames demetrius may be here in the audience , but in two instances , his great - grandfather , grandfather -- i 'm always a little perplexed about the relation , exactly -- charles eames the first time and then charles and ray eames the second time were involved in two competitions : one in 1940 , it was about organic furniture , and the second one in 1948 was low - cost furniture for the gis coming back from the war that then sparked a whole line of furniture .
and then there was good design for very low price .
there were a lot of programs in architecture and design that were about pointing people in the direction of a better design for a better life .
so , i started out in '95 with this exhibition that was called mutant materials in contemporary design .
it was about a new phase , in my opinion , in the world of design in that materials could be customized by the designers themselves .
and that put me in touch with such diverse design examples as the aerogels from the lawrence livermore lab in california ; at that time , they were beginning to be brought into the civilian market .
and at the same time , the gorgeous work of takeshi ishiguro , who did these beautiful salt - and - pepper containers that are made of rice dough .
so you see , the range is really quite diverse .
and then , for instance , this other exhibition that was entitled workspheres in 2001 , where i asked different designers to come up with ideas for the new type of work styles that were happening in the world at that time .
and you see ideo there .
it was beautiful -- it was called personal skies .
the idea was that if you had a cubicle , you could project a sky on top of your head and have your own " cielo in una stanza " -- a sky in a room -- it 's a very famous italian song .
and other examples : this was marti guixe about working on the go , and hella jongerius , my favorite , about how to work at home .
and this lets me introduce a very important idea about design : designers are the biggest synthesizers in the world .
what they do best is make a synthesis of human needs , current conditions in economy , in materials , in sustainability issues , and then what they do at the end -- if they are good -- is much more than the sum of its parts .
hella jongerius is a person that is able to make a synthesis that is really quite amazing and also quite hilarious .
the idea behind her work was that at that time , everybody was saying you have to really divide your life .
instead , she said , " no , no. work and leisure can be together . "
yeah , that 's particularly gorgeous -- it 's the tv dinner of 2001 .
there have been many other exhibitions in the meantime , but i do n't want to focus on my shows .
i would like , instead , to talk about how great some designers are .
i 've always had a hard time with the word " maverick . "
i came to the united states 13 years ago , and to this day i have to ask , " what does that mean ? "
so , this morning i went to see on the dictionary and it said that there was this gentleman that was not branding its cattle .
therefore , he was not following everybody 's lead , and therefore , he was a maverick .
so , designers do need to be mavericks , because the best way to design a successful object -- and also an object that we were missing before -- is to pretend that either it never existed or that people will be able to have a new behavior with it .
so , safe is the last exhibition that i did at moma and it ended at the beginning of last year .
it was about design that deals with safety and deals with protection .
it 's a long story because it started before 2001 and it was called emergency .
and then when 9/11 happened , i had a shock and i canceled the exhibition until , slowly but surely , it came back -- as a half - full glass instead of half - empty -- and it was about protection and safety .
but it ranged from such items as a complete de - mining equipment to these kind of water - sterilizing straws , so it was really wide - ranging .
it also had ... you know , cameron and i worked a little bit together , and some of the entries that you see in his website were actually in the exhibition .
but what is interesting is that we do n't need to talk about design and art anymore ; design uses whatever tools it has at its disposal in order to make a point .
it 's a sense of economy and a sense , also , of humor .
this is a beautiful project by ralph borland , who 's south african .
it 's a suit for civil disobedience .
the idea is that when you have a riot or a protest and the police comes towards you , you 're wearing this thing -- it 's like a big heart and it has a loudspeaker over your heart so your heartbeat is amplified -- and the police is reminded ; it 's like having a flower in front of the rifle .
and also , you can imagine , a whole group of people with the same suit will have this mounting collective heartbeat that will be scary to the police .
so , designers sometimes do n't do things that are immediately functional , but they 're functional to our understanding of issues .
tony dunne and fiona raby did this series of objects that are about our anguish and our paranoia , like this hideaway furniture that 's made in the same wood as your floor so it disappears completely and you can hide away ; or even better , the huggable atomic mushroom , which got me an article on the bulletin of atomic scientists of the united states -- i do n't think it ever happened before at moma ; or this faraday chair that is supposed to protect you from radiations .
but the interesting thing in the exhibition is the discovery that the ultimate shelter is your sense of self , and there are quite a few designers that are working on this particular topic .
this is cindy van den bremen , who is a dutch designer that 's done this series of capsters .
they are athletic gear for muslim women that enable them to ski , play tennis , do whatever they want to do without having to uncap themselves .
and sometimes by doing this kind of research , you encounter such beautiful ideas of design .
twan verdonck is really young , i think he 's 27 , and working together with some psychologist he did a series of toys that are for sensorial stimulation for children that have psychological impairments .
they 're quite beautiful .
they range from this fluffy toy that is about hugging you -- because autistic children like to be hugged tight , so it has a spring inside -- all the way to this doll with a mirror so the child can see him or herself in the mirror and regain a sense of self .
design really looks upon the whole world and it considers the world in all of its different ranges .
i was recently at a conference on luxury organized by the herald tribune in istanbul .
and it was really interesting because i was the last speaker and before me there were people that were really talking about luxury , and i did n't want to be a party pooper but at the same time i felt that i had to kind of bring back the discourse to reality .
and the truth is that there are very different kinds of luxury , and there 's luxury that is relative for people that do n't have that much .
i want to make this point by showing you two examples of design coming from a sense of economy -- very , very clear limits .
this is cuba , and this is the recycling of a squeaky toy as a bicycle bell , and this is a raincoat that is made out of rice sacks .
so they 're quite beautiful , but they 're beautiful because they 're so smart and economical .
and here is the work of two brothers from sao paulo , fernando and humberto campana , who got inspired by the poverty and smartness that they saw around them to do pieces of furniture that now are selling for an enormous amount of money .
but that 's because of the kind of strangeness of the market itself .
so really , design takes everything into account , and the interesting thing is that as the technology advances , as we become more and more wireless and impalpable , designers , instead , want us to be hands - on .
sometimes hammer - on .
this is a whole series of furniture that wants to engage you physically .
even this chair that you have to open up and then sit on so that it takes your imprint , all the way to this beautiful series of objects that are considered design by ana mir in barcelona .
from this kind of bijou made with human hair to these chocolate nipples to these intra - toe candies that your lover is supposed to suck from your toes .
it 's quite beautiful because somehow , this is a gorgeous moment for design .
many years ago i heard a mathematician from vienna , whose name was marchetti , explain how the innovation in the military industry -- therefore , secret innovation -- and the innovation in the civilian society are two sinusoids that are kind of opposed .
and that makes sense .
in moments of war there 's great technological innovation , and in the world you have to do without -- well , during the second world war , you had to do without steel , you had to do without aluminum .
and then as peace comes , all of these technologies get all of a sudden available for the civilian market .
many of you might know that the potato chip chair by charles and ray eames comes exactly from that kind of instance : fiberglass was available for civilian use all of a sudden .
i think that this is a strange moment .
the rhythm of the sinusoids has changed tremendously , just like the rhythm of our life in the past 25 years , so i 'm not sure anymore what the wavelength is .
but it surely is a very important moment for design , because not only is the technology proceeding , not only is computing technology making open - source possible also in the world of design , but also the idea of sustainability -- which is not only sustainability from the viewpoint of co 2 emissions and footprint , but also sustainability of human interrelationships -- is very much part of the work of so many designers .
and that 's why designers , more and more , are working on behaviors rather than on objects .
especially the good ones , not all of them .
i wanted to show you , for instance , the work of mathieu lehanneur , which is quite fantastic .
he 's another young designer from france who 's working -- and at this point he 's working , also , with pharmaceutical companies -- on new ways to engage patients , especially children , in taking their medicines with constancy and with certainty .
for instance , this is a beautiful container for asthma medicine that kind of inflates itself when it 's time for you to take the medicine , so the child has to go -- pffff ! -- to release and relieve the container itself .
and this other medicine is something that you can draw on your skin , so intradermal delivery enables you to joyfully be involved in this particular kind of delivery .
similarly , there 's the work of people like marti guixe that tries to involve you in a way that is really about making everything pass through your mouth so that you learn from your mistakes or from your taste , orally .
the next show that i 'm going to work on -- and i 've been bugging a lot of you about this here -- is about the relationship between design and science .
i 'm trying to find not the metaphors , but , rather , the points in common -- the common gripes , the common issues , the common preoccupations -- and i think that it will enable us to go a little further in this idea of design as an instruction , as a direction rather than a prescription of form .
and i am hoping that many of you will respond to this .
i 've sent an email already to quite a few of you .
but design and science and the possibility of visualizing different scales , and therefore , really work at the scale of the very small to make it very big and very meaningful .
thank you .
