thirteen trillion dollars in wealth has evaporated over the course of the last two years .
we 've questioned the future of capitalism .
we 've questioned the financial industry .
we 've looked at our government oversight .
we 've questioned where we 're going .
and yet , at the same time , this very well may be a seminal moment in american history , an opportunity for the consumer to actually take control and guide us to a new trajectory in america .
i 'm calling this the great unwind .
and the idea is a simple , simple idea , which is the fact that the consumer has moved from a state of anxiety to action .
consumers who represent 72 percent of the gdp of america have actually started , just like banks and just like businesses , to de - leverage , to unwind their leverage , in daily life , to remove themselves from the liability and risk that presents itself as we move forward .
so , to understand this -- and i 'm going to stress this -- it 's not about the consumer being in retreat .
the consumer is empowered .
in order to understand this , we 're going to step back and look a little bit at what 's happened over the course of the last year and a half .
so , if you 've been gone , this is the easy cliffsnotes on what 's happened in the economy . okay ?
unemployment up . housing values down . equity markets down .
commodity prices are like this .
if you 're a mom trying to manage a budget , and oil was 150 dollars a barrel last summer , and it 's somewhere between 50 and 70 , do you plan vacations ? how do you buy ?
what is your strategy in your household ?
will the bailout work ? we have national debt , detroit , currency valuations , healthcare , all these issues facing us .
you put them all together , you mix them up in a bouillabaisse , and you have consumer confidence that 's basically a ticking time - bomb .
in fact , let 's go back and look at what caused this crisis , because the consumer , all of us , in our daily lives , actually contributed a large part to the problem .
this is something i call the 50-20 paradox .
it took us 50 years to reach annual savings ratings of almost 10 percent . 50 years .
do you know what this was right here ?
this was world war ii . do you know why savings was so high ?
there was nothing to buy , unless you wanted to buy some rivets . right ?
so , what happened though , over the course of the last 20 years -- we went from a 10 percent savings rate to a negative savings rate .
because we binged . we bought extra - large cars , supersized everything , we bought remedies for restless leg syndrome .
all these things together basically created a factor where the consumer sort of drove us headlong into the crisis that we face today .
the personal debt - to - income ratio basically went from 65 percent to 135 percent in the span of about 15 years .
so consumers got overleveraged .
and of course our banks did as well , as did our federal government .
this is an absolutely staggering chart .
it shows leverage , trended out from 1919 to 2009 .
and what you end up seeing is the whole phenomenon of the fact that we are actually stepping forth and basically leveraging future education , future children in our households .
so if you look at this in the context of visualizing the bailout , what you can see is if you stack up dollar bills , first of all , 360,000 dollars is about the size of a five - foot - four guy .
but if you stack it up , you just see this amazing , staggering amount of dollars that have been put into the system to fund and bail us out .
so this is the first 315 billion .
but i read this fact the other day , that one trillion seconds equals 32 thousand years , so if you think about that , the context , the casualness with which we talk about trillion - dollar bailout here , and trillion there , we are stacking ourselves up for long - term leverage .
however , consumers have moved .
they are taking responsibility .
what we 're seeing is an uptake in the savings rate .
in fact , 11 straight months of savings have happened since the beginning of the crisis .
we are working our way back up to that 10 percent .
also , remarkably , in the fourth quarter , spending dropped to its lowest level in 62 years , almost a 3.7 percent decline .
visa now reports that more people are using debit cards than they 're using credit cards .
so we 're starting to pay for things with money that we have .
and we 're starting to be much more careful about how we save and how we invest .
but that 's not really the whole story .
because this has also been a dramatic time of transformation .
and you 've got to admit , over the course of the last year and a half , consumers have been doing some pretty weird things .
it 's been pretty staggering , what we 've lived through .
if you take into account 80 percent of all americans were born after world war ii , this is essentially our depression .
and so , as a result , some crazy things have happened .
i 'll give you some examples . lets talk about dentists , vasectomies , guns and shark attacks . okay ?
dentists report molars , you know , people grinding their teeth , coming in and reporting the fact that they 've had stress .
and so there is an increase in people having to have their fillings replaced .
guns , gun sales , according to the fbi , who does background checks , are up almost 25 percent since january .
vasectomies are up 48 percent , according to the cornell institute .
and lastly , but a very good point , hopefully not related to the former point i just made , which is that shark attacks are at their lowest level from 2003 .
does anybody know why ?
no one is at the beach . so there is a bright side to everything .
but seriously , what we see happening , and the reason i want to stress that the consumer is not in retreat , is that this is a tremendous opportunity for the consumer who drove us into this recession to lead us right back out .
and what i mean by that is that we can move from mindless consumption to mindful consumption . right ?
if you think about the last three decades , the consumer has moved from savvy about marketing in the '90s , to gathering all these amazing social and search tools in this decade , but the one thing that has been holding them back is the ability to discriminate .
by restricting their demand , consumers can actually align their values with their spending , and drive capitalism and business to not just be about more , but be about better .
we 're going to explain that right now .
based on y&r 's brandasset valuator , proprietary tool of vml and young & rubicam , we set out to understand what 's been happening in the crisis with the consumer marketplace .
we found a couple of really interesting things .
we 're going to go through four value - shifts that we see driving new consumer behaviors , that offer new management principles .
the first cultural value shift that we see is this tendency toward something we call liquid life .
this is the movement from americans defining their success on having things to having liquidity , because the less excess that you have around you , the more nimble and fleet of foot you are .
as a result , déclassé consumption is in .
déclassé consumption is the whole idea that spending money frivolously makes you look a little bit anti - fashion .
the management principle is dollars and cents .
so let 's look at some examples of this déclassé consumption that falls out of this value .
first things is we see something must be happening when p. diddy vows to tone down his bling .
but seriously , we also have this phenomenon on madison avenue and in other places , where people are actually walking out of luxury boutiques with ordinary , sort of generic paper bags to hide the brand purchases .
we see high - end haggling in fashion today .
high - end haggling for luxury and real estate .
we also see just a relaxing of ego , and sort of a dismantling of artifice .
this is a story on the yacht club that 's all basically blue collar .
blue - collar yacht club , where you can join the yacht club , but you 've got to work in the boat yard , as sort of condition of membership .
we also see the trend toward tourism that 's a little bit more low key . right ?
agritourism , going to vineyards and going to farms .
and then we also see this movement forward from dollars and cents .
what businesses can do to connect with these new mindsets is really interesting .
a couple things that are kind of cool .
one is that frito - lay figured out this liquidity thing with their consumer .
they found their consumer had more money at the beginning of the month , less at the end of the month . so what they did is they started to change their packaging .
larger packs at the beginning of the month , smaller packaging at the end of the month .
really interestingly , too , was the san francisco giants .
they 've just instituted dynamic pricing .
so it takes into account everything from the pitcher match - ups , to the weather , to the team records , in setting prices for the consumer .
another quick example of these types of movements is the rise of zynga .
zynga has risen on the consumer 's desire to not want to be locked in to fixed - cost .
again , this theme is about variable cost , variable living .
so micropayments have become huge .
and lastly , some people are using hulu actually as a device to get rid of their cable bill .
so , really clever ideas there that are kind of being taken ahold and marketers are starting to understand .
the second of the four values is this movement toward ethics and fair play .
we see that play itself out with empathy and respect .
the consumer is demanding it .
and , as a result , businesses must provide not only value , but values .
increasingly , consumers are looking at the culture of the company , looking for their conduct in the marketplace .
so , what we see with empathy and respect , lots of really hopeful things that have come out of this recession .
and i 'll give you a few examples .
one is the rise toward communities and neighborhoods , and increased emphasis on your neighbors as your support system .
also a wonderful byproduct of sort of a really lousy thing , which has been unemployment , is a rise in volunteerism that 's been noted in our country .
we also see the phenomenon -- some of you may have " boomerang kids " -- these are " boomerang alumni , " where universities are actually reconnecting with alumni in helping them with jobs , sharing skills and retraining .
we also talked about character and professionalism .
we had this miracle on the hudson in new york city , you know , in january , and suddenly sully has become a key name on babycenter .
so , from a value and values standpoint , what companies can do is connect in lots of different ways .
microsoft is doing something wonderful .
they are actually vowing to retrain two million americans with i.t. training , using their existing infrastructure to do something good .
also a really interesting company is gore - tex.
gore - tex is all about personal accountability of their management and their employees , to the point where they really kind of shun the idea of bosses .
but they also talk about the fact that their executives , all of their expense reports are put onto their company intranet for everyone to see .
complete transparency .
think twice before you have that bottle of wine .
the third of the four laws of post - crisis consumerism is about durable living .
we 're seeing on our data that consumers are realizing this is a marathon , not a sprint .
they are digging in . and they 're looking for ways to extract value out of every purchase that they make .
witness the fact that americans are holding on to their cars longer than ever before , 9.4 years on average , in march . a record .
we also see the fact that libraries have become a huge resource for america .
did you know that 68 percent of americans now carry a library card ?
the highest percentage ever in our nation 's history .
so what you see in this trend is also the accumulation of knowledge .
continuing education is up .
everything is focused on betterment , and training , and development and moving forward .
we also see a big diy movement .
i was fascinated to learn that 30 percent of all homes in america are actually built by owners .
that includes cottages and the like . but 30 percent .
so , people are getting their hands dirty . they are rolling up their sleeves .
they want these skills .
we see that with the phenomenon of raising backyard hens and chickens and ducks . and when you work out the math , they say it does n't work , but the principle is there that it 's about being sustainable and taking care of yourself .
and then we look at the high line in new york city , an excellent use of reimagining existing infrastructure for something good , which is a brand new park in new york city .
so , what brands can do , and companies , is pay dividends to consumers , be a brand that lasts , offer transparency , promise you 're going to be there beyond today 's sale .
perfect example of that is patagonia .
patagonia 's footprint chronicles basically goes through and tracks every product that they make , and gives you social responsibility , and helps you understand the ethics that are behind the product that they make .
another great example is fidelity .
rather than instant cash - back rewards on your credit or debit purchases , this is about 529 rewards for your student education .
or the interesting company sunrun .
i love this company . they 've created a consumer collective where they put solar panels on households and create a consumer - based utility , where the electricity that they generate is basically pumped back out into the marketplace .
so , it 's a consumer driven co - op.
so , the fourth sort of post - crisis consumerism that we see is this movement about return to the fold .
it 's incredibly important right now .
trust is not parceled out , as we all know .
it 's now about connecting to your communities , connecting to your social networks .
in my book i talked about the fact that 72 percent of people trust what other people say about a brand or a company , versus 15 percent on advertising .
so , in that respect , cooperative consumerism has really taken off .
this is about consumers working together to get what they want out of the marketplace .
let 's look at a couple of quick examples .
the artisanal movement is huge .
everything about locally derived products and services , supporting your local neighborhoods , whether it 's cheeses , wines and other products .
also this rise of local currencies .
realizing that it 's difficult to get loans in this environment , you 're doing business with people you trust , in your local markets .
so , this rise of this sort of local currency is another really interesting phenomenon .
and then they did a recent report i thought was fascinating .
they actually started , in certain communities in the united states , start to publish people 's electricity usage .
and what they found out is when that was available for public record , the people 's electricity usage in those communities dropped .
then we also look at the idea of cow - pooling , which is the whole phenomenon of consumers to buy meat from organic farms that they know is safe and controlled in the way that they want it to be controlled .
and then there is this other really interesting movement that 's happened in california , which is about carrot mobs .
the traditional thing would be to boycott right ?
have a stick ? well why not have a carrot ?
so these are consumers organizing , pooling their resources to incentify companies to do good .
and then we look at what companies can do .
this is all the opportunity about being a community organizer .
you have to realize that you ca n't fight and control this .
you actually need to organize it .
you need to harness it . you need to give it meaning .
and there is lots of really interesting examples here that we see .
first is just the rise of the fact that zagat 's has actually moved out of and diversified from rating restaurants , into actually rating healthcare .
so what credentials does zagat 's have ?
well , they have a lot , because it 's their network of people . right ?
so that becomes a very powerful force for them to make their brand more elastic .
then you look at the phenomenon of kogi .
this kogi does n't exist . it 's a moving truck . right ?
it 's a moving truck through l.a. , and the only way you can find it is through twitter .
or you look at johnson & johnson 's momversations .
a phenomenal blog that 's been built up .
where j&j basically is tapping into the power of mommy bloggers , allowing them to basically create a forum where they can communicate and they can connect .
and it 's also become a very , very valuable sort of advertising revenue for j&j as well .
this plus the fact that you 've got phenomenal work from ceos from ford to zappos , connecting on twitter , creating an open environment , allowing their employees to be part of the process , rather than hidden behind walls .
you see this rising force in sort of total transparency and openness that companies are starting to adopt , all because the consumer is demanding it .
so , when we look at this and we step back , what i believe is that the crisis that exists today is definitely real .
it 's been tremendously powerful for consumers .
but , at the same time , this is also a tremendous opportunity .
and the chinese character for crisis is actually the same side of the same coin .
crisis equals opportunity .
what we 're seeing with consumers right now is the ability for them to actually lead us forward out of this recession .
so , we believe that values - driven spending will force capitalism to be better .
it will drive innovation .
it will make longer - lasting products . it will create better , more intuitive customer service .
it will give us the opportunity to connect with companies that share the values that we share .
so , when we look back and step out at this and see the beginning of these trends that we 're seeing in our data , we see a very hopeful picture for the future of america .
thank you very much .
