i want to talk about penguins today .
but first , i want to start by saying that we need a new operating system , for the oceans and for the earth .
when i came to the galapagos 40 years ago , there were 3,000 people that lived in the galapagos .
now there are over 30,000 .
there were two jeeps on santa cruz .
now , there are around a thousand trucks and buses and cars there .
so the fundamental problems that we face are overconsumption and too many people .
it 's the same problems in the galapagos , except , obviously , it 's worse here , in some ways , than other places .
because we 've only doubled the population of the earth since the 1960s -- a little more than doubled -- but we have 6.7 billion people in the world , and we all like to consume .
and one of the major problems that we have is our operating system is not giving us the proper feedback .
we 're not paying the true environmental costs of our actions .
and when i came at age 22 to live on fernandina , let me just say , that i had never camped before .
i had never lived alone for any period of time , and i 'd never slept with sea lions snoring next to me all night .
but moreover , i 'd never lived on an uninhabited island .
punta espinosa is where i lived for over a year , and we call it uninhabited because there are no people there .
but it 's alive with life ; it 's hardly uninhabited .
so a lot has happened in the last 40 years , and what i learned when i came to the galapagos is the importance of wild places , wild things , certainly wildlife , and the amazing qualities that penguins have .
penguins are real athletes : they can swim 173 kilometers in a day .
they can swim at the same speed day and night -- that 's faster than any olympic swimmer .
i mean , they can do like seven kilometers an hour and sustain it .
but what is really amazing , because of this deepness here , emperor penguins can go down more than 500 meters and they can hold their breath for 23 minutes .
magellanic penguins , the ones that i work on , they can dive to about 90 meters and they can stay down for about 4.6 minutes .
humans , without fins : 90 meters , 3.5 minutes .
and i doubt anybody in this room could really hold their breath for 3.5 minutes .
you have to train to be able to do that .
so penguins are amazing athletes .
the other thing is , i 've never met anybody that really does n't say that they like penguins .
they 're comical , they walk upright , and , of course , they 're diligent .
and , more importantly , they 're well - dressed .
so they have all the criteria that people normally like .
but scientifically , they 're amazing because they 're sentinels .
they tell us about our world in a lot of different ways , and particularly the ocean .
this is a picture of a galapagos penguin that 's on the front of a little zodiac here in the galapagos .
and that 's what i came to study .
i thought i was going to study the social behavior of galapagos penguins , but you already know penguins are rare .
these are the rarest penguins in the world .
why i thought i was going to be able to do that , i do n't know .
but the population has changed dramatically since i was first here .
when i counted penguins for the first time and tried to do a census , we just counted all the individual beaks that we could around all these islands .
we counted around 2,000 , so i do n't know how many penguins there really are , but i know i can count 2,000 .
if you go and do it now , the national parks count about 500 .
so we have a quarter of the penguins that we did 40 years ago .
and this is true of most of our living systems .
we have less than we had before , and most of them are in fairly steep decline .
and i want to just show you a little bit about why .
that 's a penguin braying to tell you that it 's important to pay attention to penguins .
most important of all , i did n't know what that was the first time i heard it .
and you can imagine sleeping on fernandina your first night there and you hear this lonesome , plaintful call .
i fell in love with penguins , and it certainly has changed the rest of my life .
what i found out i was studying is really the difference in how the galapagos changes , the most extreme variation .
you 've heard about these el ninos , but this is the extreme that penguins all over the world have to adapt to .
this is a cold - water event called la nina .
where it 's blue and it 's green , it means the water is really cold .
and so you can see this current coming up -- in this case , the humboldt current -- that comes all the way out to the galapagos islands , and this deep undersea current , the cromwell current , that upwells around the galapagos .
that brings all the nutrients : when this is cold in the galapagos , it 's rich , and there 's plenty of food for everyone .
when we have extreme el nino events , you see all this red , and you see no green out here around the galapagos .
that means that there 's no upwelling , and there 's basically no food .
so it 's a real desert for not only for the penguins and the sea lions and the marine iguanas ...
things die when there 's no food .
but we did n't even know that that affected the galapagos when i went to study penguins .
and you can imagine being on an island hoping you 're going to see penguins , and you 're in the middle of an el nino event and there are no penguins .
they 're not breeding ; they 're not even around .
i studied marine iguanas at that point .
but this is a global phenomenon , we know that .
and if you look along the coast of argentina , where i work now , at a place called punta tombo -- the largest magellanic penguin colony in the world down here about 44 degrees south latitude -- you see that there 's great variation here .
some years , the cold water goes all the way up to brazil , and other years , in these la nina years , it does n't .
so the oceans do n't always act together ; they act differently , but that is the kind of variation that penguins have to live with , and it 's not easy .
so when i went to study the magellanic penguins , i did n't have any problems .
there were plenty of them .
this is a picture at punta tombo in february showing all the penguins along the beach .
i went there because the japanese wanted to start harvesting them and turning them into high fashion golf gloves , protein and oil .
fortunately , nobody has harvested any penguins and we 're getting over 100,000 tourists a year to see them .
but the population is declining and it 's declined fairly substantially , about 21 percent since 1987 , when i started these surveys , in terms of number of active nests .
here , you can see where punta tombo is , and they breed in incredibly dense colonies .
we know this because of long - term science , because we have long - term studies there .
and science is important in informing decision makers , and also in changing how we do and knowing the direction of change that we 're going in .
and so we have this penguin project . the wildlife conservation society has funded me along with a lot of individuals over the last 27 years to be able to produce these kinds of maps .
and also , we know that it 's not only galapagos penguins that are in trouble , but magellanics and many other species of penguins .
and so we have started a global penguin society to try to focus on the real plight of penguins .
this is one of the plights of penguins : oil pollution .
penguins do n't like oil and they do n't like to swim through oil .
the nice thing is , if you look down here in argentina , there 's no surface oil pollution from this composite map .
but , in fact , when we went to argentina , penguins were often found totally covered in oil .
so they were just minding their own business .
they ended up swimming through ballast water that had oil in it .
because when tankers carry oil they have to have ballast at some point , so when they 're empty , they have the ballast water in there .
when they come back , they actually dump this oily ballast water into the ocean .
why do they do that ? because it 's cheaper , because they do n't pay the real environmental costs .
we usually do n't , and we want to start getting the accounting system right so we can pay the real cost .
at first , the argentine government said , " no , there 's no way .
you ca n't find oiled penguins in argentina .
we have laws , and we ca n't have illegal dumping ; it 's against the law . "
so we ended up spending nine years convincing the government that there were lots of oiled penguins .
in some years , like this year , we found more than 80 percent of the adult penguins dead on the beach were covered in oil .
these little blue dots are the fledglings -- we do this survey every march -- which means that they 're only in the environment from january until march , so maybe three months at the most that they could get covered in oil .
and you can see , in some years over 60 percent of the fledglings were oiled .
eventually , the government listened and , amazingly , they changed their laws .
they moved the tanker lanes 40 kilometers farther off shore , and people are not doing as much illegal dumping .
so what we 're seeing now is very few penguins are oiled .
why are there even these penguins oiled ?
because we 've solved the problem in chubut province , which is like a state in argentina where punta tombo is -- so that 's about 1,000 kilometers of coastline -- but we have n't solved the problem in northern argentina , uruguay and brazil .
so now i want to show you that penguins are affected .
i 'm just going to talk about two things .
this is climate change . now this has really been a fun study because i put satellite tags on the back of these magellanic penguins .
try to convince donors to give you a couple thousand dollars to glue a satellite tag on the back of penguins .
but we 've been doing this now for more than a decade to learn where they go .
we thought we needed a marine protected area of about 30 kilometers , and then we put a satellite tag on the back of a penguin .
and what the penguins show us -- and these are all the little dots from where the penguins ' positions were for penguins in incubation in 2003 -- and what you see is some of these individuals are going 800 kilometers away from their nests .
so that means as their mate is sitting on the nest incubating the eggs , the other one is out there foraging , and the longer they have to stay gone , the worse condition the mate is in when the mate comes back .
and , of course , all of this then leads to a vicious cycle and you ca n't raise a lot of chicks .
here you see in 2003 -- these are all the dots of where the penguins are -- they were raising a little over a half of a chick .
here , you can see in 2006 , they raised almost three quarters of a chick per nest , and you can see that they 're closer to punta tombo ; they 're not going as far away .
this past year , in 2009 , you can see that they 're now raising about a fourth of a chick , and some of these individuals are going more than 900 kilometers away from their nests .
so it 's kind of like you having a job in chicago , and then you get transferred to st. louis , and your mate is not happy about this because you 've got to pay airfare , because you 're gone longer .
the same thing 's true for penguins as well .
and they 're going about , on average now , 40 kilometers farther than they did a decade ago .
we need to be able to get information out to the general public .
and so we started a publication with the society for conservation that we think presents cutting - edge science in a new , novel way , because we have reporters that are good writers that actually can distill the information and make it accessible to the general public .
so if you 're interested in cutting - edge science and smarter conservation , you should join with our 11 partners -- some of them here in this room , like the nature conservancy -- and look at this magazine because we need to get information out about conservation to the general public .
lastly i want to say that all of you , probably , have had some relationship at some time in your life with a dog , a cat , some sort of pet , and you recognized that those are individuals .
and some of you consider them almost part of your family .
if you had a relationship with a penguin , you 'd see it in the same sort of way .
they 're amazing creatures that really change how you view the world because they 're not that different from us : they 're trying to make a living , they 're trying to raise their offspring , they 're trying to get on and survive in the world .
this is turbo the penguin .
turbo 's never been fed .
he met us and got his name because he started standing under my diesel truck : a turbo truck , so we named him turbo .
turbo has taken to knocking on the door with his beak , we let him in and he comes in here .
and i just wanted to show you what happened one day when turbo brought in a friend .
so this is turbo .
he 's coming up to one of my graduate students and flipper patting , which he would do to a female penguin .
and you can see , he 's not trying to bite .
this guy has never been in before and he 's trying to figure out , " what is going on ?
what is this guy doing ?
this is really pretty weird . "
and you 'll see soon that my graduate student ...
and you see , turbo 's pretty intent on his flipper patting .
and now he 's looking at the other guy , saying , " you are really weird . "
and now look at this : not friendly .
so penguins really differ in their personalities just like our dogs and our cats .
we 're also trying to collect our information and become more technologically literate .
so we 're trying to put that in computers in the field .
and penguins are always involved in helping us or not helping us in one way or another .
this is a radio frequency id system .
you put a little piece of rice in the foot of a penguin that has a barcode , so it tells you who it is .
it walks over the pad , and you know who it is .
okay , so here are a few penguins coming in .
see , this one 's coming back to its nest .
they 're all coming in at this time , walking across there , just kind of leisurely coming in .
here 's a female that 's in a hurry . she 's got food .
she 's really rushing back , because it 's hot , to try to feed her chicks .
and then there 's another fellow that will leisurely come by .
look how fat he is . he 's walking back to feed his chicks .
then i realize that they 're playing king of the box .
this is my box up here , and this is the system that works .
you can see this penguin , he goes over , he looks at those wires , does not like that wire .
he unplugs the wire ; we have no data .
so , they really are pretty amazing creatures .
ok .
most important thing is : only you can change yourself , and only you can change the world and make it better , for people as well as penguins .
so , thank you very much .
