i am the daughter of a forger , not just any forger ...
when you hear the word " forger , " you often understand " mercenary . "
you understand " forged currency , " " forged pictures . "
my father is no such man .
for 30 years of his life , he made false papers -- never for himself , always for other people , and to come to the aid of the persecuted and the oppressed .
let me introduce him .
here is my father at age 19 .
it all began for him during world war ii , when at age 17 he found himself thrust into a forged documents workshop .
he quickly became the false papers expert of the resistance .
and it 's not a banal story -- after the liberation he continued to make false papers until the '70s .
when i was a child i knew nothing about this , of course .
this is me in the middle making faces .
i grew up in the paris suburbs and i was the youngest of three children .
i had a " normal " dad like everybody else , apart from the fact that he was 30 years older than ...
well , he was basically old enough to be my grandfather .
anyway , he was a photographer and a street educator , and he always taught us to obey the law very strictly .
and , of course , he never talked about his past life when he was a forger .
there was , however , an incident i 'm going to tell you about , that perhaps could have led me suspect something .
i was in high school and got a bad grade , a rare event for me , so i decided to hide it from my parents .
in order to do that , i set out to forge their signature .
i started working on my mother 's signature , because my father 's is absolutely impossible to forge .
so , i got working . i took some sheets of paper and started practicing , practicing , practicing , until i reached what i thought was a steady hand , and went into action .
later , while checking my school bag , my mother got hold of my school assignment and immediately saw that the signature was forged .
she yelled at me like she never had before .
i went to hide in my bedroom , under the blankets , and then i waited for my father to come back from work with , one could say , much apprehension .
i heard him come in .
i remained under the blankets . he entered my room , sat on the corner of the bed , and he was silent , so i pulled the blanket from my head , and when he saw me he started laughing .
he was laughing so hard , he could not stop and he was holding my assignment in his hand .
then he said , " but really , sarah , you could have worked harder ! ca n't you see it 's really too small ? "
indeed , it 's rather small .
i was born in algeria .
there i would hear people say my father was a " moudjahid " and that means " fighter . "
later on , in france , i loved eavesdropping on grownups ' conversations , and i would hear all sorts of stories about my father 's previous life , especially that he had " done " world war ii , that he had " done " the algerian war .
and in my head i would be thinking that " doing " a war meant being a soldier .
but knowing my father , and how he kept saying that he was a pacifist and non - violent , i found it very hard to picture him with a helmet and gun .
and indeed , i was very far from the mark .
one day , while my father was working on a file for us to obtain french nationality , i happened to see some documents that caught my attention .
these are real !
these are mine , i was born an argentinean .
but the document i happened to see that would help us build a case for the authorities was a document from the army that thanked my father for his work on behalf of the secret services .
and then , suddenly , i went " wow ! "
my father , a secret agent ?
it was very james bond .
i wanted to ask him questions , which he did n't answer .
and later , i told myself that one day i would have to question him .
and then i became a mother and had a son , and finally decided it was time -- that he absolutely had to talk to us .
i had become a mother and he was celebrating his 77th birthday , and suddenly i was very , very afraid .
i feared he 'd go and take his silences with him , and take his secrets with him .
i managed to convince him that it was important for us , but possibly also for other people that he shared his story .
he decided to tell it to me and i made a book , from which i 'm going to read you some excerpts later .
so , his story . my father was born in argentina .
his parents were of russian descent .
the whole family came to settle in france in the '30s .
his parents were jewish , russian and above all , very poor .
so at the age of 14 my father had to work .
and with his only diploma , his primary education certificate , he found himself working at a dyer - dry cleaner .
that 's where he discovered something totally magical , and when he talks about it , it 's fascinating -- it 's the magic of dyeing chemistry .
during that time the war was happening and his mother was killed when he was 15 .
this coincided with the time when he threw himself body and soul into chemistry because it was the only consolation for his sadness .
all day he would ask many questions to his boss to learn , to accumulate more and more knowledge , and at night , when no one was looking , he 'd put his experience to practice .
he was mostly interested in ink bleaching .
all this to tell you that if my father became a forger , actually , it was almost by accident .
his family was jewish , so they were hounded .
finally they were all arrested and taken to the drancy camp and they managed to get out at the last minute thanks to their argentinean papers .
well , they were out , but they were always in danger . the big " jew " stamp was still on their papers .
it was my grandfather who decided they needed false documents .
my father had been instilled with such respect for the law that although he was being persecuted , he 'd never thought of false papers .
but it was he who went to meet a man from the resistance .
in those times documents had hard covers , they were filled in by hand , and they stated your job .
in order to survive , he needed to be working . he asked the man to write " dyer . "
suddenly the man looked very , very interested .
as a " dyer , " do you know how to bleach ink marks ?
of course he knew .
and suddenly the man started explaining that actually the whole resistance had a huge problem : even the top experts could not manage to bleach an ink , called " indelible , " the " waterman " blue ink .
and my father immediately replied that he knew exactly how to bleach it .
now , of course , the man was very impressed with this young man of 17 who could immediately give him the formula , so he recruited him .
and actually , without knowing it , my father had invented something we can find in every schoolchild 's pencil case : the so - called " correction pen . "
but it was only the beginning .
that 's my father .
as soon as he got to the lab , even though he was the youngest , he immediately saw that there was a problem with the making of forged documents .
all the movements stopped at falsifying .
but demand was ever - growing and it was difficult to tamper with existing documents .
he told himself it was necessary to make them from scratch .
he started a press . he started photoengraving .
he started making rubber stamps .
he started inventing all kind of things -- with some materials he invented a centrifuge using a bicycle wheel .
anyway , he had to do all this because he was completely obsessed with output .
he had made a simple calculation : in one hour he could make 30 forged documents .
if he slept one hour , 30 people would die .
this sense of responsibility for other people 's lives when he was just 17 -- and also his guilt for being a survivor , since he had escaped the camp when his friends had not -- stayed with him all his life .
and this is maybe what explains why , for 30 years , he continued to make false papers at the expense of all kinds of sacrifices .
i 'd like to talk about those sacrifices , because there were many .
there were obviously financial sacrifices because he always refused to be paid .
to him , being paid would have meant being a mercenary .
if he had accepted payment , he would n't be able to say " yes " or " no " depending on what he deemed a just or unjust cause .
so he was a photographer by day , and a forger by night for 30 years .
he was broke all of the time .
then there were the emotional sacrifices : how can one live with a woman while having so many secrets ?
how can one explain what one does at night in the lab , every single night ?
of course , there was another kind of sacrifice involving his family that i understood much later .
one day my father introduced me to my sister .
he also explained to me that i had a brother , too , and the first time i saw them i must have been three or four , and they were 30 years older than me .
they are both in their sixties now .
in order to write the book , i asked my sister questions . i wanted to know who my father was , who was the father she had known .
she explained that the father that she 'd had would tell them he 'd come and pick them up on sunday to go for a walk .
they would get all dressed up and wait for him , but he would almost never come .
he 'd say , " i 'll call . " he would n't call .
and then he would not come .
then one day he totally disappeared .
time passed , and they thought he had surely forgotten them , at first .
then as time passed , at the end of almost two years , they thought , " well , perhaps our father has died . "
and then i understood that asking my father so many questions was stirring up a whole past he probably did n't feel like talking about because it was painful .
and while my half brother and sister thought they 'd been abandoned , orphaned , my father was making false papers .
and if he did not tell them , it was of course to protect them .
after the liberation he made false papers to allow the survivors of concentration camps to immigrate to palestine before the creation of israel .
and then , as he was a staunch anti - colonialist , he made false papers for algerians during the algerian war .
after the algerian war , at the heart of the international resistance movements , his name circulated and the whole world came knocking at his door .
in africa there were countries fighting for their independence : guinea , guinea - bissau , angola .
and then my father connected with nelson mandela 's anti - apartheid party .
he made false papers for persecuted black south africans .
there was also latin america .
my father helped those who resisted dictatorships in the dominican republic , haiti , and then it was the turn of brazil , argentina , venezuela , el salvador , nicaragua , colombia , peru , uruguay , chile and mexico .
then there was the vietnam war .
my father made false papers for the american deserters who did not wish to take up arms against the vietnamese .
europe was not spared either .
my father made false papers for the dissidents against franco in spain , salazar in portugal , against the colonels ' dictatorship in greece , and even in france .
there , just once , it happened in may of 1968 .
my father watched , benevolently , of course , the demonstrations of the month of may , but his heart was elsewhere , and so was his time because he had over 15 countries to serve .
once , though , he agreed to make false papers for someone you might recognize .
he was much younger in those days , and my father agreed to make false papers to enable him to come back and speak at a meeting .
he told me that those false papers were the most media - relevant and the least useful he 'd had to make in all his life .
but , he agreed to do it , even though daniel cohn - bendit 's life was not in danger , just because it was a good opportunity to mock the authorities , and to show them that there 's nothing more porous than borders -- and that ideas have no borders .
all my childhood , while my friends ' dads would tell them grimm 's fairy tales , my father would tell me stories about very unassuming heroes with unshakeable utopias who managed to make miracles .
and those heroes did not need an army behind them .
anyhow , nobody would have followed them , except for a handful [ of ] men and women of conviction and courage .
i understood much later that actually it was his own story my father would tell me to get me to sleep .
i asked him whether , considering the sacrifices he had to make , he ever had any regrets .
he said no.
he told me that he would have been unable to witness or submit to injustice without doing anything .
he was persuaded , and he 's still convinced that another world is possible -- a world where no one would ever need a forger .
he 's still dreaming about it .
my father is here in the room today .
his name is adolfo kaminsky and i 'm going to ask him to stand up .
thank you .
