in africa we say , " god gave the white man a watch and gave the black man time . "
i think , how is it possible for a man with so much time to tell his story in 18 minutes ?
i think it will be quite a challenge for me .
most african stories these days , they talk about famine , hiv and aids , poverty or war .
but my story that i would like to share with you today is the one about success .
it is about a country in the southwest of africa called namibia .
namibia has got 2.1 million people , but it is only twice the size of california .
i come from a region in the remote northwest part of the country .
it 's called kunene region .
and in the center of kunene region is the village of sesfontein . this is where i was born .
this is where i 'm coming from .
most people that are following the story of angelina jolie and brad pitt will know where namibia is .
they love namibia for its beautiful dunes , that are even taller than the empire state building .
wind and time have twisted our landscape into very strange shapes , and these shapes are speckled with wildlife that has become so adapted to this harsh and strange land .
i 'm a himba .
you might wonder , why are you wearing these western clothes ?
i 'm a himba and namibian .
a himba is one of the 29 ethnic groups in namibia .
we live a very traditional lifestyle .
i grew up herding , looking after our livestock -- goats , sheep and cattle .
and one day , my father actually took me into the bush .
he said , " john , i want you to become a good herder .
boy , if you are looking after our livestock and you see a cheetah eating our goat -- cheetah is very nervous -- just walk up to it .
walk up to it and smack it on the backside . "
" and he will let go of the goat and run off . "
but then he said , " boy , if you run into a lion , do n't move .
do n't move . stand your ground .
puff up and just look it in the eye and it may not want to fight you . "
but then , he said , " if you see a leopard , boy , you better run like hell . "
" imagine you run faster than those goats you are looking after . "
in this way -- in this way , i actually started to learn about nature .
in addition to being an ordinary namibian and in addition to being a himba i 'm also a trained conservationist .
and it is very important if you are in the field to know what to confront and what to run from .
i was born in 1971 .
we lived under apartheid regime .
the whites could farm , graze and hunt as they wished , but we black , we were not regarded as responsible to use wildlife .
whenever we tried to hunt , we were called poachers .
and as a result , we were fined and locked up in jail .
between 1966 and 1990 , the u.s. and soviet interests fought for control over my country .
and you know , during war time , there are militaries , armies , that are moving around .
and the army hunted for valuable rhino horns and tusks .
they could sell these things for anything between $ 5,000 a kilo .
during the same year almost every himba had a rifle .
because it was wartime , the british .303 rifle was just all over the whole country .
then in the same time , around 1980 , we had a very big drought .
it killed almost everything that was left .
our livestock was almost at the brink of extinction , protected as well .
we were hungry .
i remember a night when a hungry leopard went into the house of one of our neighbors and took a sleeping child out of the bed .
it 's a very sad story .
but even today , that memory is still in people 's minds .
they can pinpoint the exact location where this all happened .
and then , in the same year , we almost lost everything .
and my father said , " why do n't you just go to school ? "
and they sent me off to school , just to get busy somewhere there .
and the year i went to school , my father actually got a job with a non - governmental organization called irdnc , integrated rural development and nature conservation .
they actually spend a lot of time a year in the communities .
they were trusted by the local communities like our leader , joshua kangombe .
joshua kangombe saw what was happening : wildlife disappearing , poaching was skyrocketing , and the situation seemed very hopeless .
death and despair surrounded joshua and our entire communities .
but then , the people from irdnc proposed to joshua : what if we pay people that you trust to look after wildlife ?
do you have anybody in your communities , or people , that know the bush very well and that know wildlife very well ?
the headman said : " yes . our poachers . "
" eh ? the poachers ? "
" yes . our poachers . "
and that was my father .
my father has been a poacher for quite a long time .
instead of shooting poachers dead like they were doing elsewhere in africa , irdnc has helped men reclaim their abilities to manage their peoples and their rights to own and manage wildlife .
and thus , as people started feeling ownership over wildlife , wildlife numbers started coming back , and that 's actually becoming a foundation for conservation in namibia .
with independence , the whole approach of community getting involved was embraced by our new government .
three things that actually help to build on this foundation : the very first one is honoring of tradition and being open to new ideas .
here is our tradition : at every himba village , there is a sacred fire .
and at this sacred fire , the spirit of our ancestors speak through the headman and advise us where to get water , where to get grazings , and where to go and hunt .
and i think this is the best way of regulating ourselves on the environment .
and here are the new ideas .
transporting rhinos using helicopters i think is much easier than talking through a spirit that you ca n't see , is n't it ?
and these things we were taught by outsiders .
we learned these things from outsiders .
we needed new boundaries to describe our traditional lands ; we needed to learn more things like gps just to see whether -- can gps really reflect the true reflection of the land or is this just a thing made somewhere in the west ?
and we then wanted to see whether we can match our ancestral maps with digital maps made somewhere in the world .
and through this , we actually started realizing our dreams , and we maintained honoring our traditions but we were still open to new ideas .
the second element is that we wanted to have a life , a better life where we can benefit through many things .
most poachers , like my father , were people from our own community .
they were not people from outside .
these were our own people .
and sometimes , once they were caught , they were treated with respect , brought back into the communities and they were made part of the bigger dreams .
the best one , like my father -- i 'm not campaigning for my father -- they were put in charge to stop others from poaching .
and when this thing started going on , we started becoming one community , renewing our connection to nature .
and that was a very strong thing in namibia .
the last element that actually helped develop these things was the partnerships .
our government has given legal status over our traditional lands .
the other partners that we have got is business communities .
business communities helped bring namibia onto the world map and they have also helped make wildlife a very valuable land use like any other land uses such as agriculture .
and most of my conservation colleagues today that you find in namibia have been trained through the initiative , through the involvement of world wildlife fund in the most up - to - date conservation practices .
they have also given funding for two decades to this whole program .
and so far , with the support of world wildlife fund , we 've been able to scale up the very small programs to national programs today .
namibia ... or sesfontein was no more an isolated village somewhere , hidden away in namibia .
with these assets we are now part of the global village .
thirty years have passed since my father 's first job as a community game guard .
it 's very unfortunate that he passed away and he cannot see the success as i and my children see it today .
when i finished school in 1995 , there were only 20 lions in the entire northwest -- in our area .
but today , there are more than 130 lions .
so please , if you go to namibia , make sure that you stay in the tents .
do n't walk out at night !
the black rhino -- they were almost extinct in 1982 .
but today , kunene has the largest concentration of black rhino -- free - roaming black rhinos -- in the world .
this is outside the protected area .
the leopard -- they are now in big numbers but they are now far away from our village , because the natural plain has multiplied , like zebras , springboks and everything .
they stay very much far away because this other thing has multiplied from less than a thousand to tens of thousands of animals .
what started as very small , community rangers getting community involved , has now grown into something that we call conservancies .
conservancies are legally instituted institutions by the government , and these are run by the communities themselves , for their benefit .
today , we have got 60 conservancies that manage and protect over 13 million hectares of land in namibia .
we have already reshaped conservation in the entire country .
nowhere else in the world has community - adopted conservation at this scale .
in 2008 , conservancy generated 5.7 million dollars .
this is our new economy -- an economy based on the respect of our natural resources .
and we are able to use this money for many things : very importantly , we put it in education .
secondly , we put it for infrastructure . food .
very important as well -- we invest this money in aids and hiv education .
you know that africa is being affected by these viruses .
and this is the good news from africa that we have to shout from the rooftops .
and now , what the world really needs is for you to help me and our partners take some of what we have learned in namibia to other places with similar problems : places like mongolia , or even in your own backyards , the northern great plains , where buffalo and other animals have suffered and many communities are in decline .
i like that one : namibia serving as a model to africa , and africa serving as a model to the united states .
we were successful in namibia because we dreamed of a future that was much more than just a healthy wildlife .
we knew conservation would fail if it does n't work to improve the lives of the local communities .
so , come and talk to me about namibia , and better yet , come to namibia and see for yourself how we have done it .
and please , do visit our website to learn more and see how you can help cbnrm in africa and across the world .
thank you very much .
