when i first arrived in beautiful zimbabwe , it was difficult to understand that 35 percent of the population is hiv positive .
it really was n't until i was invited to the homes of people that i started to understand the human toll of the epidemic .
for instance , this is herbert with his grandmother .
when i first met him , he was sitting on his grandmother 's lap .
he has been orphaned , as both of his parents died of aids , and his grandmother took care of him until he too died of aids .
he liked to sit on her lap because he said that it was painful for him to lie in his own bed .
when she got up to make tea , she placed him in my own lap and i had never felt a child that was that emaciated .
before i left , i actually asked him if i could get him something .
i thought he would ask for a toy , or candy , and he asked me for slippers , because he said that his feet were cold .
this is joyce who 's -- in this picture -- 21 .
single mother , hiv positive .
i photographed her before and after the birth of her beautiful baby girl , issa .
and i was last week walking on lafayette street in manhattan and got a call from a woman who i did n't know , but she called to tell me that joyce had passed away at the age of 23 .
joyce 's mother is now taking care of her daughter , like so many other zimbabwean children who 've been orphaned by the epidemic .
so a few of the stories .
with every picture , there are individuals who have full lives and stories that deserve to be told .
all these pictures are from zimbabwe .
chris anderson : kirsten , will you just take one minute , just to tell your own story of how you got to africa ?
kirsten ashburn : mmm , gosh .
ca : just -- ka : actually , i was working at the time , doing production for a fashion photographer .
and i was constantly reading the new york times , and stunned by the statistics , the numbers .
it was just frightening .
so i quit my job and decided that that 's the subject that i wanted to tackle .
and i first actually went to botswana , where i spent a month -- this is in december 2000 -- then went to zimbabwe for a month and a half , and then went back again this march 2002 for another month and a half in zimbabwe .
ca : that 's an amazing story , thank you .
kb : thanks for letting me show these .
