basking sharks are awesome creatures . they are just magnificent .
they grow 10 meters long .
some say bigger .
they might weigh up to two tons .
some say up to five tons .
they 're the second largest fish in the world .
they 're also harmless plankton - feeding animals .
and they are thought to be able to filter a cubic kilometer of water every hour and can feed on 30 kilos of zoo plankton a day to survive .
they 're fantastic creatures .
and we 're very lucky in ireland , we have plenty of basking sharks and plenty of opportunities to study them .
they were also very important to coast communities going back hundreds of years , especially the around the claddagh , duff , connemara region where subsistence farmers used to sail out on their hookers and open boats sometimes way off shore , sometimes to a place called the sunfish bank , which is about 30 miles west of achill island , to kill the basking sharks .
this is an old woodcut from the 17 , 1800s .
so they were very important , and they were important for the oil out of their liver .
a third of the size of the basking shark is their liver , and it 's full of oil .
you get gallons of oil from their liver .
and that oil was used especially for lighting , but also for dressing wounds and other things .
in fact , the streetlights in 1742 of galway , dublin and waterford were linked with sunfish oil .
and " sunfish " is one of the words for basking sharks .
so they were incredibly important animals .
they 've been around a long time , have been very important to coast communities .
probably the best documented basking shark fishery in the world is that from achill island .
this is keem bay up in achill island .
and sharks used to come into the bay .
and the fishermen would tie a net off the headland , string it out along the other net .
and as the shark came round , it would hit the net , the net would collapse on it .
it would often drown and suffocate .
or at times , they would row out in their small currachs and kill it with a lance through the back of the neck .
and then they 'd tow the sharks back to purteen harbor , boil them up , use the oil .
they used to use the flesh as well for fertilizer and also would fin the sharks .
this is probably the biggest threat to sharks worldwide -- it is the finning of sharks .
we 're often all frightened of sharks thanks to " jaws . "
maybe five or six people get killed by sharks every year .
there was someone recently , was n't there ? just a couple weeks ago .
we kill about 100 million sharks a year .
so i do n't know what the balance is , but i think sharks have got more right to be fearful of us than we have of them .
it was a well - documented fishery , and as you can see here , it peaked in the 50s where they were killing 1,500 sharks a year .
and it declined very fast -- a classic boom and bust fishery , which suggests that a stock has been depleted or there 's low reproductive rates .
and they killed about 12,000 sharks in this period , literally just by stringing a manila rope off the tip of keem bay at achill island .
sharks were still killed up into the mid - 80s , especially after places like dunmore east in county waterford .
and about two and a half , 3,000 sharks were killed up till '85 , many by norwegian vessels .
the black , you ca n't really see this , but these are norwegian basking shark hunting vessels , and the black line in the crow 's nest signifies this is a shark vessel rather than a whaling vessel .
the importance of basking sharks to the coast communities is recognized through the language .
now i do n't pretend to have any irish , but in kerry they were often known as " ainmhide na seolta , " the monster with the sails .
and another title would be " liop an da lapa , " the unwieldy beast with two fins .
" liabhan mor , " suggesting a big animal .
or my favorite , " liabhan chor greine , " the great fish of the sun.
and that 's a lovely , evocative name .
on tory island , which is a strange place anyway , they were known as muldoons , and no one seems to know why .
hope there 's no one from tory here ; lovely place .
but more commonly all around the island , they were known as the sunfish .
and this represents their habit of basking on the surface when the sun is out .
there 's great concern that basking sharks are depleted all throughout the world .
some people say it 's not population decline .
it might be a change in the distribution of plankton .
and it 's been suggested that basking sharks would make fantastic indicators of climate change , because they 're basically continuous plankton recorders swimming around with their mouth open .
they 're now listed as vulnerable under the iucn .
there 's also moves in europe to try and stop catching them .
there 's now a ban on catching them and even landing them and even landing ones that are caught accidentally .
they 're not protected in ireland .
in fact , they have no legislative status in ireland whatsoever , despite our importance for the species and also the historical context within which basking sharks reside .
we know very little about them .
and most of what we do know is based on their habit of coming to the surface .
and we try to guess what they 're doing from their behavior on the surface .
i only found out last year , at a conference on the isle of man , just how unusual it is to live somewhere where basking sharks regularly , frequently and predictably come to the surface to " bask . "
and it 's a fantastic opportunity in science to see and experience basking sharks , and they are awesome creatures .
and it gives us a fantastic opportunity to actually study them , to get access to them .
so what we 've been doing a couple of years -- but last year was a big year -- is we started tagging sharks so we could try to get some idea of sight fidelity and movements and things like that .
so we concentrated mainly in north donegal and west kerry as the two areas where i was mainly active .
and we tagged them very simply , not very hi - tech , with a big , long pole .
this is a beachcaster rod with a tag on the end .
go up in your boat and tag the shark .
and we were very effective .
we tagged 105 sharks last summer .
we got 50 in three days off inishowen peninsula .
half the challenge is to get access , is to be in the right place at the right time .
but it 's a very simple and easy technique .
i 'll show you what they look like .
we use a pole camera on the boat to actually film shark .
one is to try and work out the gender of the shark .
we also deployed a couple of satellite tags , so we did use hi - tech stuff as well .
these are archival tags .
so what they do is they store the data .
a satellite tag only works when the air is clear of the water and can send a signal to the satellite .
and of course , sharks , fish , are underwater most of the time .
so this tag actually works out the locations of shark depending on the timing and the setting of the sun , plus water temperature and depth .
and you have to kind of reconstruct the path .
what happens is that you set the tag to detach from the shark after a fixed period , in this case it was eight months , and literally to the day the tag popped off , drifted up , said hello to the satellite and sent , not all the data , but enough data for us to use .
and this is the only way to really work out the behavior and the movements when they 're under water .
and here 's a couple of maps that we 've done .
that one , you can see that we tagged both off kerry .
and basically it spent all its time , the last eight months , in irish waters .
christmas day it was out on the shelf edge .
and here 's one that we have n't ground - truthed it yet with sea surface temperature and water depth , but again , the second shark kind of spent most of its time in and around the irish sea .
colleagues from the isle of man last year actually tagged one shark that went from the isle of man all the way out to nova scotia in about 90 days .
that 's nine and a half thousand kilometers . we never thought that happened .
another colleague in the states tagged about 20 sharks off massachusetts , and his tags did n't really work .
all he knows is where he tagged them and he knows where they popped off .
and his tags popped off in the caribbean and even in brazil .
and we thought that basking sharks were temperate animals and only lived in our latitude .
but in actual fact , they 're obviously crossing the equator as well .
so very simple things like that , we 're trying to learn about basking sharks .
one thing that i think is a very surprising and strange thing is just how low the genetic diversity of sharks are .
now i 'm not a geneticist , so i 'm not going to pretend to understand the genetics .
and that 's why it 's great to have collaboration .
whereas i 'm a field person , i get panic attacks if i have to spend too many hours in a lab with a white coat on -- take me away .
so we can work with geneticists who understand that .
so when they looked at the genetics of basking sharks , they found that the diversity was incredibly low .
if you look at the first line really , you can see that all these different shark species are all quite similar .
i think this means basically that they 're all sharks and they 've come from a common ancestry .
if you look at nucleotide diversity , which is more genetics that are passed on through parents , you can see that basking sharks , if you look at the first study , was an order of magnitude less diversity than other shark species .
and you see that this work was done in 2006 .
before 2006 , we had no idea of the genetic variability of basking sharks .
we had no idea , did they distinguish into different populations ?
were there subpopulations ?
and of course , that 's very important if you want to know what the population size is and the status of the animals .
so les noble in aberdeen kind of found this a bit unbelievable really .
so he did another study which are much more expensive , much more time consuming , and , to his surprise , came up with almost identical results .
so it does seem to be that basking sharks , for some reason , have incredibly low diversity .
and it 's thought maybe it was a bottleneck , a genetic bottleneck thought to be 12,000 years ago , and this has caused a very low diversity .
and yet , if you look at whale sharks , which is the other plankton eating large shark , its diversity is much greater .
so it does n't really make sense at all .
they found that there was no genetic differentiation between any of the world 's oceans of basking sharks .
so even though basking sharks are found throughout the world , you could n't tell the difference genetically from one from the pacific , the atlantic , new zealand , or from ireland , south africa .
they all basically seem the same .
but again , it 's kind of surprising . you would n't really expect that .
i do n't understand this . i do n't pretend to understand this .
and i suspect most geneticists do n't understand it either , but they produce the numbers .
so you can actually estimate the population size based on the diversity of the genetics .
and rus hoelzel came up with an effective population size : 8,200 animals .
that 's it .
8,000 animals in the world .
you 're thinking , " that 's just ridiculous . no way . "
so les did a finer study and he found out it came out about 9,000 .
and using different microsatellites gave the different results .
but the average of all these studies came out -- the mean is about 5,000 , which i personally do n't believe , but then i am a skeptic .
but even if you toss a few numbers around , you 're probably talking of an effective population of about 20,000 animals .
do you remember how many they killed off achill there in the 70s and the 50s ?
so what it tells us actually is that there 's actually a risk of extinction of this species because its population is so small .
in fact , of those 20,000 , 8,000 were thought to be females .
there 's only 8,000 basking shark females in the world ?
i do n't know . i do n't believe it .
the problem with this is they were constrained with samples .
they did n't get enough samples to really explore the genetics in enough detail .
so where do you get samples from for your genetic analysis ?
well one obvious source is dead sharks , dead sharks washed up .
we might get two or three dead sharks washed up in ireland a year , if we 're kind of lucky .
another source would be fisheries bycatch .
we were getting quite a few caught in surface drift nets .
that 's banned now , and that 'll be good news for the sharks .
and some are caught in nets , in trawls .
this is a shark that was actually landed in howth just before christmas , illegally , because you 're not allowed to do that under e.u. law , and was actually sold for eight euros a kilo as shark steak .
they even put a recipe up on the wall , until they were told this was illegal .
and they actually did get a fine for that .
so if you look at all those studies i showed you , the total number of samples worldwide is 86 at present .
so it 's very important work , and they can ask some really good questions , and they can tell us about population size and subpopulations and structure , but they 're constrained by lack of samples .
now when we were out tagging our sharks , this is how we tagged them on the front of a rib -- get in there fast -- occasionally the sharks do react .
and on one occasion when we were up in malin head up in donegal , a shark smacked the side of the boat with his tail , more , i think , in startle to the fact that a boat came near it , rather than the tag going in .
and that was fine . we got wet . no problem .
and then when myself and emmett got back to malin head , to the pier , i noticed some black slime on the front of the boat .
and i remembered -- i used to spend a lot of time out on commercial fishing boats -- i remember fishermen telling me they can always tell when a basking shark 's been caught in the net because it leaves this black slime behind .
so i was thinking that must have come from the shark .
now we had an interest in getting tissue samples for genetics because we knew they were very valuable .
and we would use conventional methods -- i have a crossbow , you see the crossbow in my hand there , which we use to sample whales and dolphins for genetic studies as well .
so i tried that , i tried many techniques .
all it was doing was breaking my arrows because the shark skin is just so strong .
there was no way we were going to get a sample from that .
so that was n't going to work .
so when i saw the black slime on the bow of the boat , i thought , " if you take what you 're given in this world . . . "
so i scraped it off .
and i had a little tube with alcohol in it to send to the geneticists .
so i scraped the slime off and i sent it off to aberdeen .
and i said , " you might try that . "
and they sat on it for months actually .
it was only because we had a conference on the isle of man .
but i kept emailing , saying , " have you had a chance to look at my slime yet ? "
and he was like , " yeah , yeah , yeah , yeah . later , later , later . "
anyway he thought he 'd better do it , because i never met him before and he might lose face if he had n't done the thing i sent him .
and he was amazed that they actually got dna from the slime .
and they amplified it and they tested it and they found , yes , this was actually basking shark dna , which was got from the slime .
and so he was all very excited .
it became known as simon 's shark slime .
and i thought , " hey , you know , i can build on this . "
so we thought , okay , we 're going to try to get out and get some slime .
so having spent three and a half thousand on satellite tags , i then thought i 'd invest 7.95 -- the price is still on it -- in my local hardware store in kilrush for a mop handle and even less money on some oven cleaners .
and i wrapped the oven cleaner around the end of the mop handle and was desperate , desperate to have an opportunity to get some sharks .
now this was into august now , and normally sharks peak at june , july .
and you rarely see them .
you can only rarely be in the right place to find sharks into august .
so we were desperate .
so we rushed out to blasket as soon as we heard there were sharks there and managed to find some sharks .
so by just rubbing the mop handle down the shark as it swam under the boat -- you see , here 's a shark that 's running under the boat here -- we managed to collect slime .
and here it is .
look at that lovely , black shark slime .
and in about half an hour , we got five samples , five individual sharks , were sampled using simon 's shark slime sampling system .
i 've been working on whales and dolphins in ireland for 20 years now , and they 're kind of a bit more dramatic .
you probably saw the humpback whale footage that we got there a month or two ago off county wexford .
and you always think you might have some legacy you can leave the world behind .
and i was thinking of humpback whales breaching and dolphins .
but hey , sometimes these things are sent to you and you just have to take them when they come .
so this is possibly going to be my legacy -- simon 's shark slime .
so we got more money this year to carry on collecting more and more samples .
and one thing that is kind of very useful is that we use a pole cameras -- this is my colleague joanne with a pole camera -- where you can actually look underneath the shark .
and what you 're trying to look at is the males have claspers , which kind of dangle out behind the back of the shark .
so you can quite easily tell the gender of the shark .
so if we can tell the gender of the shark before we sample it , we can tell the geneticist this was taken from a male or a female .
because at the moment , they actually have no way genetically of telling the difference between a male and a female , which i found absolutely staggering , because they do n't know what primers to look for .
and being able to tell the gender of a shark has got very important for things like policing the trade in basking shark and other species through societies , because it is illegal to trade any sharks .
and they are caught and they are on the market .
so as a field biologist , you just want to get encounters with these animals .
you want to learn as much as you can .
they 're often quite brief . they 're often very seasonally constrained .
and you just want to learn as much as you can as soon as you can .
but is n't it fantastic that you can then offer these samples and opportunities to other disciplines , such as geneticists , who can gain so much more from that .
so as i said , these things are sent to you in strange ways . grab them while you can .
i 'll take that as my scientific legacy .
hopefully i might get something a bit more dramatic and romantic before i die .
but for the time being , thank you for that .
and keep an eye out for sharks .
if you 're more interested , we have a basking shark website now just set up .
so thank you and thank you for listening .
