i was born in den bosch , where the painter hieronymus bosch named himself after .
and so i 've always been very fond of this painter who lived and worked in the 15th century .
and what is interesting about him in relation to morality is that he lived at a time where religion 's influence was waning , and he was sort of wondering , i think , what would happen with society if there was no religion or if there was less religion .
and so he painted this famous painting , " the garden of earthly delights , " which some have interpreted as being humanity before the fall , or being humanity without any fall at all .
and so it makes you wonder , what would happen if we had n't tasted the fruit of knowledge , so to speak , and what kind of morality would we have ?
much later , as a student , i went to a very different garden , a zoological garden in arnhem where we keep chimpanzees .
this is me at an early age with a baby chimpanzee .
and i discovered there that the chimpanzees are very power hungry and wrote a book about it .
and at that time the focus in a lot of animal research was on aggression and competition .
i painted a whole picture of the animal kingdom , and humanity included , was that deep down we are competitors , we are aggressive , we 're all out for our own profit basically .
this is the launch of my book .
i 'm not sure how well the chimpanzees read it , but they surely seemed interested in the book .
now in the process of doing all this work on power and dominance and aggression and so on , i discovered that chimpanzees reconcile after fights .
and so what you see here is two males who have had a fight .
they ended up in a tree , and one of them holds out a hand to the other .
and about a second after i took the picture , they came together in the fork of the tree and they kissed and embraced each other .
now this is very interesting because at the time everything was about competition and aggression , and so it would n't make any sense .
the only thing that matters is that you win or that you lose .
but why would you reconcile after a fight ?
that does n't make any sense .
this is the way bonobos do it . bonobos do everything with sex .
and so they also reconcile with sex .
but the principle is exactly the same .
the principle is that you have a valuable relationship that is damaged by conflict , so you need to do something about it .
so my whole picture of the animal kingdom , and including humans also , started to change at that time .
so we have this image in political science , economics , the humanities , philosophy for that matter , that man is a wolf to man .
and so deep down our nature 's actually nasty .
i think it 's a very unfair image for the wolf .
the wolf is , after all , a very cooperative animal .
and that 's why many of you have a dog at home , which has all these characteristics also .
and it 's really unfair to humanity , because humanity is actually much more cooperative and empathic than given credit for .
so i started getting interested in those issues and studying that in other animals .
so these are the pillars of morality .
if you ask anyone , " what is morality based on ? "
these are the two factors that always come out .
one is reciprocity , and associated with it is a sense of justice and a sense of fairness .
and the other one is empathy and compassion .
and human morality is more than this , but if you would remove these two pillars , there would be not much remaining i think .
and so they 're absolutely essential .
so let me give you a few examples here .
this is a very old video from the yerkes primate center where they train chimpanzees to cooperate .
so this is already about a hundred years ago that we were doing experiments on cooperation .
what you have here is two young chimpanzees who have a box , and the box is too heavy for one chimp to pull in .
and of course , there 's food on the box .
otherwise they would n't be pulling so hard .
and so they 're bringing in the box .
and you can see that they 're synchronized .
you can see that they work together , they pull at the same moment .
it 's already a big advance over many other animals who would n't be able to do that .
and now you 're going to get a more interesting picture , because now one of the two chimps has been fed .
so one of the two is not really interested in the task anymore .
now look at what happens at the very end of this .
he takes basically everything .
so there are two interesting parts about this .
one is that the chimp on the right has a full understanding he needs the partner -- so a full understanding of the need for cooperation .
the second one is that the partner is willing to work even though he 's not interested in the food .
why would that be ? well that probably has to do with reciprocity .
there 's actually a lot of evidence in primates and other animals that they return favors .
so he will get a return favor at some point in the future .
and so that 's how this all operates .
we do the same task with elephants .
now with elephants , it 's very dangerous to work with elephants .
another problem with elephants is that you cannot make an apparatus that is too heavy for a single elephant .
now you can probably make it , but it 's going to be a pretty flimsy apparatus i think .
and so what we did in that case -- we do these studies in thailand for josh plotnik -- is we have an apparatus around which there is a rope , a single rope .
and if you pull on this side of the rope , the rope disappears on the other side .
so two elephants need to pick it up at exactly the same time and pull .
otherwise nothing is going to happen and the rope disappears .
and the first tape you 're going to see is two elephants who are released together arrive at the apparatus .
the apparatus is on the left with food on it .
and so they come together , they arrive together , they pick it up together and they pull together .
so it 's actually fairly simple for them .
there they are .
and so that 's how they bring it in .
but now we 're going to make it more difficult .
because the whole purpose of this experiment is to see how well they understand cooperation .
do they understand that as well as the chimps , for example ?
and so what we do in the next step is we release one elephant before the other , and that elephant needs to be smart enough to stay there and wait and not pull at the rope -- because if he pulls at the rope , it disappears and the whole test is over .
now this elephant does something illegal that we did not teach it .
but it shows the understanding that he has , because he puts his big foot on the rope , stands on the rope and waits there for the other , and then the other is going to do all the work for him .
so it 's what we call freeloading .
but it shows the intelligence that the elephants have .
they develop several of these alternative techniques that we did not approve of necessarily .
so the other elephant is now coming and is going to pull it in .
now look at the other . the other does n't forget to eat , of course .
this was the cooperation , reciprocity part .
now something on empathy .
empathy is my main topic at the moment of research .
and empathy has sort of two qualities .
one is the understanding part of it . this is just a regular definition : the ability to understand and share the feelings of another .
and the emotional part .
and so empathy has basically two channels .
one is the body channel .
if you talk with a sad person , you 're going to adopt a sad expression and a sad posture , and before you know it you feel sad .
and that 's sort of the body channel of emotional empathy , which many animals have .
your average dog has that also .
that 's actually why people keep mammals in the home and not turtles or snakes or something like that who do n't have that kind of empathy .
and then there 's a cognitive channel , which is more that you can take the perspective of somebody else .
and that 's more limited .
there 's few animals -- i think elephants and apes can do that kind of thing -- but there are very few animals who can do that .
so synchronization , which is part of that whole empathy mechanism is a very old one in the animal kingdom .
and in humans , of course , we can study that with yawn contagion .
humans yawn when others yawn .
and it 's related to empathy .
it activates the same areas in the brain .
also , we know that people who have a lot of yawn contagion are highly empathic .
people who have problems with empathy , such as autistic children , they do n't have yawn contagion .
so it is connected .
and we study that in our chimpanzees by presenting them with an animated head .
so that 's what you see on the upper - left , an animated head that yawns .
and there 's a chimpanzee watching , an actual real chimpanzee watching a computer screen on which we play these animations .
so yawn contagion that you 're probably all familiar with -- and maybe you 're going to start yawning soon now -- is something that we share with other animals .
and that 's related to that whole body channel of synchronization that underlies empathy and that is universal in the mammals basically .
now we also study more complex expressions . this is consolation .
this is a male chimpanzee who has lost a fight and he 's screaming , and a juvenile comes over and puts an arm around him and calms him down .
that 's consolation . it 's very similar to human consolation .
and consolation behavior , it 's empathy driven .
actually the way to study empathy in human children is to instruct a family member to act distressed , and then they see what young children do .
and so it is related to empathy , and that 's the kind of expressions we look at .
we also recently published an experiment you may have heard about .
it 's on altruism and chimpanzees where the question is , do chimpanzees care about the welfare of somebody else ?
and for decades it had been assumed that only humans can do that , that only humans worry about the welfare of somebody else .
now we did a very simple experiment .
we do that on chimpanzees that live in lawrenceville , in the field station of yerkes .
and so that 's how they live .
and we call them into a room and do experiments with them .
in this case , we put two chimpanzees side - by - side .
and one has a bucket full of tokens , and the tokens have different meanings .
one kind of token feeds only the partner who chooses , the other one feeds both of them .
so this is a study we did with vicky horner .
and here you have the two color tokens .
so they have a whole bucket full of them .
and they have to pick one of the two colors .
you will see how that goes .
so if this chimp makes the selfish choice , which is the red token in this case , he needs to give it to us .
so we pick it up , we put it on a table where there 's two food rewards , but in this case only the one on the right gets food .
the one on the left walks away because she knows already .
that this is not a good test for her .
then the next one is the pro - social token .
so the one who makes the choices -- that 's the interesting part here -- for the one who makes the choices , it does n't really matter .
so she gives us now a pro - social token and both chimps get fed .
so the one who makes the choices always gets a reward .
so it does n't matter whatsoever .
and she should actually be choosing blindly .
but what we find is that they prefer the pro - social token .
so this is the 50 percent line that 's the random expectation .
and especially if the partner draws attention to itself , they choose more .
and if the partner puts pressure on them -- so if the partner starts spitting water and intimidating them -- then the choices go down .
it 's as if they 're saying , " if you 're not behaving , i 'm not going to be pro - social today . "
and this is what happens without a partner , when there 's no partner sitting there .
and so we found that the chimpanzees do care about the well - being of somebody else -- especially , these are other members of their own group .
so the final experiment that i want to mention to you is our fairness study .
and so this became a very famous study .
and there 's now many more , because after we did this about 10 years ago , it became very well known .
and we did that originally with capuchin monkeys .
and i 'm going to show you the first experiment that we did .
it has now been done with dogs and with birds and with chimpanzees .
but with sarah brosnan we started out with capuchin monkeys .
so what we did is we put two capuchin monkeys side - by - side .
again , these animals , they live in a group , they know each other .
we take them out of the group , put them in a test chamber .
and there 's a very simple task that they need to do .
and if you give both of them cucumber for the task , the two monkeys side - by - side , they 're perfectly willing to do this 25 times in a row .
so cucumber , even though it 's only really water in my opinion , but cucumber is perfectly fine for them .
now if you give the partner grapes -- the food preferences of my capuchin monkeys correspond exactly with the prices in the supermarket -- and so if you give them grapes -- it 's a far better food -- then you create inequity between them .
so that 's the experiment we did .
recently we videotaped it with new monkeys who 'd never done the task , thinking that maybe they would have a stronger reaction , and that turned out to be right .
the one on the left is the monkey who gets cucumber .
the one on the right is the one who gets grapes .
the one who gets cucumber , note that the first piece of cucumber is perfectly fine .
the first piece she eats .
then she sees the other one getting grape , and you will see what happens .
so she gives a rock to us . that 's the task .
and we give her a piece of cucumber and she eats it .
the other one needs to give a rock to us .
and that 's what she does .
and she gets a grape and she eats it .
the other one sees that .
she gives a rock to us now , gets , again , cucumber .
she tests a rock now against the wall .
she needs to give it to us .
and she gets cucumber again .
so this is basically the wall street protest that you see here .
let me tell you -- i still have two minutes left , let me tell you a funny story about this .
this study became very famous and we got a lot of comments , especially anthropologists , economists , philosophers .
they did n't like this at all .
because they had decided in their minds , i believe , that fairness is a very complex issue and that animals cannot have it .
and so one philosopher even wrote us that it was impossible that monkeys had a sense of fairness because fairness was invented during the french revolution .
now another one wrote a whole chapter saying that he would believe it had something to do with fairness if the one who got grapes would refuse the grapes .
now the funny thing is that sarah brosnan , who 's been doing this with chimpanzees , had a couple of combinations of chimpanzees where , indeed , the one who would get the grape would refuse the grape until the other guy also got a grape .
so we 're getting very close to the human sense of fairness .
and i think philosophers need to rethink their philosophy for awhile .
so let me summarize .
i believe there 's an evolved morality .
i think morality is much more than what i 've been talking about , but it would be impossible without these ingredients that we find in other primates , which are empathy and consolation , pro - social tendencies and reciprocity and a sense of fairness .
and so we work on these particular issues to see if we can create a morality from the bottom up , so to speak , without necessarily god and religion involved , and to see how we can get to an evolved morality .
and i thank you for your attention .
