it is interesting that in the united states , the most significant health - care budget goes to cardiovascular disease care , whether it 's private or public .
there 's no comparison at all .
in africa -- where it is a major killer -- it is totally ignored .
and that situation cannot be right . we must do something about it .
a health status of a nation parallels development of that nation .
17 million people die every year from heart disease .
32 million heart attacks and strokes occur .
most of this is in developing countries , and the majority is in africa .
85 percent of global disease burden for cardiovascular disease is in developing countries -- not in the west -- and yet 90 percent of the resources are in the west .
who is at risk ? people like you .
it 's not just the africans that should be concerned about that .
all friends of africa , that will have reason to be in africa at some point in time , should be very concerned about this deplorable situation .
has anyone here wondered what will happen if you go back to your room at night , and you start getting chest pains , shortness of breath , sweating ?
you 're having a heart attack . what are you going to do ?
will you fly back to the u.s. , germany , europe ?
no , you will die . 50 percent will die within 24 hours , if not treated .
this is what 's going on .
in a look at the map of the u.s. -- the graph here , 10 million people here , 10 million here .
by the time you get to 50 , it 's almost no one left in nigeria -- life expectancy is 47 .
it 's not because some people do n't survive childhood illnesses -- they do -- but they do not survive after the time that they reach about 45 years old and 50 years old .
and those are the times they 're most productive .
those are the times that they should be contributing to africa 's development . but they 're not there .
the best way to spiral into a cycle of poverty is to kill the parents .
if you cannot secure the parents , you cannot guarantee the security of the african child .
what are the risk factors ?
it 's very well known . i 'm not going to spend a lot of time on those .
these are just for information : hypertension , diabetes , obesity , lack of exercise . the usual suspects .
right here in tanzania , 30 percent of individuals have hypertension .
20 percent are getting treated .
only less than one percent are adequately treated .
if we can treat hypertension alone in africa , we 'll save 250,000 lives a year . that 's quite significant !
easy to treat . look at the situation in mauritius .
in eight short years -- we 're here talking about hiv , malaria , which is all good .
we cannot make the mistakes we 've made with malaria and hiv .
in eight short years , non - communicable diseases will become the leading causes of death in africa .
that is something to keep in mind . we ca n't deal with it with situations like this .
this is a typical african hospital . we ca n't depend on the elites -- they go to usa , germany , u.k. for treatment . unbelievable .
you ca n't depend on foreign aid alone .
here is the situation : countries are turning inwards .
post - 9/11 , [ the ] united states has had a lot of trouble to deal with , their own internal issues .
so , they spend their money trying to fix those problems .
you ca n't rightly -- it 's not their responsibility , it is my responsibility . i have to take care of my own problems .
if they help , that 's good ! but that is not my expectation .
these worsening indices of health care or health studies in africa demand a new look . we cannot keep on doing things the way we 've always done them .
if they have not worked , we have to look for alternative solutions .
i 'm here to talk to you about solutions .
this has been -- what has been a difficult sign to some of us .
several years ago , we started thinking about it .
everyone knows the problem . no one knows what the solutions are .
we decided that we needed to put our money where our mouth is .
everyone is ready to throw in money , in terms of free money aid to developing countries .
talk about sustainable investment , no one is interested .
you ca n't raise money .
i have done businesses in healthcare in the united states -- i live in nashville , tennessee , health care capital of america .
[ it 's ] very easy to raise money for health - care ventures .
but start telling them , you know , we 're going to try to do it in nigeria -- everyone runs away .
that is totally wrong . those of you in the audience here , if you want to help africa , invest money in sustainable development .
let me lead you through a day in the life of the heart institute , so you get a glimpse of what we do , and i 'll talk a little bit more about it .
what we have done is to show that high - quality health care , comparable to the best anywhere in the world , can be done in a developing country environment .
we have 25 positions right now -- all of them trained , board certified in the usa , canada or britain .
we have every modality that can be done in vanderbilt , cleveland clinic -- everywhere in the u.s. -- and we do it for about 10 percent of the cost that you will need to do those things in the united states .
additionally , we have a policy that no one is ever turned away because of ability to pay .
we take care of everyone .
whether you have one dollar , two dollars -- it does n't matter .
and i will tell you how we 're able to do it .
we make sure that we select our equipment properly .
we go for modular units . units that have multi - modality functions have modular components . easy to repair , and because of that , we do not take things that are not durable and cannot last .
we emphasize training , and we make sure that this process is regenerative .
very soon we will all be dead and gone , but the problems will stay , unless we have people taking over from where we stopped .
we made sure that we produced some things ourselves .
we do not buy unit doses of radiopharmaceuticals .
we get the generators from the companies .
we manufacture them in - house , ourselves . that keeps the costs down .
so , for a radiopharmaceutical in the u.s. -- that you 'll get a unit dose for 250 dollars -- when we 're finished manufacturing it in - house , we come at a price of about two dollars .
we recognize that the only way to bridge the gap between the rich and poor countries is through education and technology .
all these problems we 're talking about -- if we bring development , they will all disappear .
technology is a great equalizer . how do we make it work ?
it 's been proved : self - care is cost - effective .
it extends opportunity to the rural centers , and we can use expertise in a very smart way .
this is the way our centers are set up .
we currently have three locations in the caribbean , and we 're planning a fourth one .
and we have now decided to go into africa .
we will be doing the west african heart institute in port harcourt , nigeria . that project will be starting within the next few months . we hope to open in 2008-09 .
and we will do other centers .
this model can be adapted to every disease process .
all the units , all the centers , are linked through a switched hub to a central server , and all the images are populated to review stations .
and we designed this telemedicine solution . it 's proprietary to us , and we are happy to share what we have learned with anyone who is interested in doing it . you can still be profitable .
we make sure that the telemedicine platform gives access to expert medical specialists anywhere in the world , just by a click of the button .
i 'll lead you through , to see how this happens .
this is at the heart institute . the doctors from anywhere can log in .
i can call you in switzerland and say , " listen , go into our system .
look at mrs. jones . look at the study , tell me what you think . "
they 'll give me that information , and we 'll make the care of the patient better .
the patient does n't have to travel .
he does n't have to experience the anxiety of not knowing because of limited expertise .
we also use [ an ] electronic medical record system .
i 'm happy to say that the things we have implemented -- 80 percent of u.s. practices do not have them , and yet the technology is there .
but you know , they have that luxury .
because if you ca n't get it in nashville , you can travel to birmingham , two hours away , and you 'll get it . if you ca n't get it in cleveland , you can go to cincinnati . we do n't have that luxury , so we have to make it happen .
when we do it , we will put the cost of care down .
and we 'll extend it to the rural centers and make it affordable .
and everyone will get the care they deserve .
it cannot just be technology , we recognize that .
prevention must be part of the solution -- we emphasize that .
but , you know , you have to tell people what can be done .
it 's not possible to tell people to do what is going to be expensive , and they go home and ca n't do it .
they need to be alive , they need to feed .
we recommend exercise as the most effective , simple , easy thing to do .
we have had walks every year -- every march , april .
we form people into groups and make them go into challenges .
which group loses the most weight , we give them prizes .
which groups record more walking distance by pedometer , we give them prizes . we do this constantly .
we encourage them to bring children .
that way we start exposing the children from very early on , on what these issues are . because once they learn it , they will stay with it . in doing this we have created at least 100 skilled jobs in jamaica alone , and these are physicians with expertise and special training .
we have taken care of over 1,000 indigent patients that could have died , including four free pacemakers in patients with complete heart block . for those that understand cardiology , complete heart block means certain death .
if you do n't get this pacemaker , you will be dead .
so we are pleased with that .
indirectly , we have saved the government of jamaica five million dollars from people that would have gone to miami or atlanta for care .
and we 've hopefully saved a lot of lives .
by the end of this year , we would have contributed over one million dollars in indigent care . in the first four months , it 's been 340,000 dollars , averaging 85,000 dollars a month . the government will not do that , because they have competing needs .
they need to put resources elsewhere . but we can still do it .
people say , " how can you do that ? " this is how we can do that .
at least 4,000 rich jamaicans that were heading to miami for treatment have self - confessed that they did not go to miami because of the heart institute of the caribbean .
and , if they went to miami , they will spend significantly more -- eight to 10 times more . and they feel happy spending it at home , getting the same quality of care .
and for that money -- for every one patient that has the money to pay , it gives us an opportunity to take care of at least four people that do not have the resources to pay .
for this to work , this progress must be sustainable .
so , we emphasize training . training is critical .
we have gone further : we have formed a relationship with the university of technology , jamaica , where i now have an appointment .
and we are starting a biomedical engineering program , so that we will train people locally , who can repair that equipment .
that way we 're not going to deal with obsolescence and all those kinds of issues .
we 're also starting ancillary health - care technology training programs -- training people in echocardiography , cardiac ultrasound , those kinds of things . now , with that kind of training , it gives people motivation .
because now they will get a bachelors degree in medical imaging and all that kind of stuff . in the process , i want you to just hear from the trainees themselves what it has meant for them .
dr. jason topping : my name is jason topping .
i 'm a senior resident in anesthesia in intensive care at the university hospital of the west indies .
i came to the heart institute in 2006 , as part of my elective in my anesthesia and intensive care program .
i spent three months at the heart institute .
there 's been no doubt around my colleagues about the utility of the training i received here , and i think there 's been an increased interest now in -- particularly in echocardiography and its use in our setting .
sharon lazarus : i am an echocardiographer at the heart institute of the caribbean , since the past two years . i received training at this institution .
i think this aspect of training in cardiology that the heart institute of the caribbean has introduced in jamaica is very important in terms of diagnosing cardiac diseases .
ernest madu : the lesson in this is that it can be done , and it can be sustained , and you can make it possible for everyone .
who are we to decide that poor people cannot get the best care ?
when have you been appointed to play god ?
it is not my decision . my job is to make sure that every person , no matter what fate has assigned to you , will have the opportunity to get the best quality health care in life .
next stop is west african heart institute , that we are going to be doing in port harcourt , nigeria , as i said before . we will do other centers across west africa .
we will extend the same system into other areas , like dialysis treatment .
and anyone who is interested in doing it in any health care situation , we will be happy to assist you and tell you how we 've done it , and how you can do it . if we do this , we can change the face of health care in africa .
africa has been good to us ; it is time for us to give back to africa .
i am going . those who want to come , i welcome you to come along with me .
thank you .
