you may not know this , but you are celebrating an anniversary with me .
i 'm not married , but one year ago today , i woke up from a month - long coma , following a double lung transplant .
crazy , i know . insane .
thank you .
six years before that , i was starting my career as an opera singer in europe , when i was diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension -- also known as ph .
it happens when there 's a thickening in the pulmonary veins , making the right side of the heart work overtime , and causing what i call the reverse - grinch effect .
my heart was three - and - a - half sizes too big .
physical activity becomes very difficult for people with this condition , and usually after two to five years , you die .
i went to see this specialist , and she was top - of - the - field and told me i had to stop singing .
she said , " those high notes are going to kill you . "
while she did n't have any medical evidence to back up her claim that there was a relationship between operatic arias and pulmonary hypertension , she was absolutely emphatic i was singing my own obituary .
i was very limited by my condition , physically .
but i was not limited when i sang , and as air came up from my lungs , through my vocal cords and passed my lips as sound , it was the closest thing i had ever come to transcendence .
and just because of someone 's hunch , i was n't going to give it up .
thankfully , i met reda girgis , who is dry as toast , but he and his team at johns hopkins did n't just want me to survive , they wanted me to live a meaningful life .
this meant making trade - offs .
i come from colorado .
it 's a mile high , and i grew up there with my 10 brothers and sisters and two adoring parents .
well , the altitude exacerbated my symptoms .
so i moved to baltimore to be near my doctors and enrolled in a conservatory nearby .
i could n't walk as much as i used to , so i opted for five - inch heels .
and i gave up salt , i went vegan , and i started taking huge doses of sildenafil , also known as viagra .
my father and my grandfather were always looking for the newest thing in alternative or traditional therapies for ph , but after six months , i could n't walk up a small hill . i could n't climb a flight of stairs .
i could barely stand up without feeling like i was going to faint .
i had a heart catheterization , where they measure this internal arterial pulmonary pressure , which is supposed to be between 15 and 20 .
mine was 146 .
i like to do things big , and it meant one thing : there is a big gun treatment for pulmonary hypertension called flolan , and it 's not just a drug ; it 's a way of life .
doctors insert a catheter into your chest , which is attached to a pump that weighs about four - and - a - half pounds .
every day , 24 hours , that pump is at your side , administering medicine directly to your heart , and it 's not a particularly preferable medicine in many senses .
this is a list of the side effects : if you eat too much salt , like a peanut butter and jelly sandwich , you 'll probably end up in the icu .
if you go through a metal detector , you 'll probably die .
if you get a bubble in your medicine -- because you have to mix it every morning -- and it stays in there , you probably die .
if you run out of medicine , you definitely die .
no one wants to go on flolan .
but when i needed it , it was a godsend .
within a few days , i could walk again .
within a few weeks , i was performing , and in a few months , i debuted at the kennedy center .
the pump was a little bit problematic when performing , so i 'd attach it to my inner thigh with the help of the girdle and an ace bandage .
literally hundreds of elevator rides were spent with me alone stuffing the pump into my spanx , hoping the doors would n't open unexpectedly .
and the tubing coming out of my chest was a nightmare for costume designers .
i graduated from graduate school in 2006 , and i got a fellowship to go back to europe .
a few days after arriving , i met this wonderful , old conductor who started casting me in all of these roles .
and before long , i was commuting between budapest , milan and florence .
though i was attached to this ugly , unwanted , high - maintenance , mechanical pet , my life was kind of like the happy part in an opera -- very complicated , but in a good way .
then in february of 2008 , my grandfather passed away .
he was a big figure in all of our lives , and we loved him very much .
it certainly did n't prepare me for what came next .
seven weeks later , i got a call from my family .
my father had been in a catastrophic car accident , and he died .
at 24 , my death would have been entirely expected .
but his -- well , the only way i can articulate how it felt was that it precipitated my medical decline .
against my doctors ' and family 's wishes , i needed to go back for the funeral .
i had to say goodbye in some way , shape or form .
but soon i was showing signs of right - heart failure , and i had to return to sea level , doing so knowing that i probably would never see my home again .
i canceled most of my engagements that summer , but i had one left in tel aviv , so i went .
after one performance , i could barely drag myself from the stage to the taxicab .
i sat down and felt the blood rush down from my face , and in the heat of the desert , i was freezing cold .
my fingers started turning blue , and i was like , " what is going on here ? "
i heard my heart 's valves snapping open and closed .
the cab stopped , and i pulled my body from it feeling each ounce of weight as i walked to the elevator .
i fell through my apartment door and crawled to the bathroom where i found my problem : i had forgotten to mix in the most important part of my medicine .
i was dying , and if i did n't mix that stuff up fast , i would never leave that apartment alive .
i started mixing , and i felt like everything was going to fall out through one hole or another , but i just kept on going .
finally , with the last bottle in and the last bubble out , i attached the pump to the tubing and lay there hoping it would kick in soon enough .
if it did n't , i 'd probably see my father sooner than i anticipated .
thankfully , in a few minutes , i saw the signature hive - like rash appear on my legs , which is a side effect of the medication , and i knew i 'd be okay .
we 're not big on fear in my family , but i was scared .
i went back to the states , anticipating i 'd return to europe , but the heart catheterization showed that i was n't going anywhere further that a flight - for - life from johns hopkins hospital .
i performed here and there , but as my condition deteriorated , so did my voice .
my doctor wanted me to get on the list for a lung transplant .
i did n't .
i had two friends who had recently died months after having very challenging surgeries .
i knew another young man , though , who had ph who died while waiting for one .
i wanted to live .
i thought stem cells were a good option , but they had n't developed to a point where i could take advantage of them yet .
i officially took a break from singing , and i went to the cleveland clinic to be reevaluated for the third time in five years , for transplant .
i was sitting there kind of unenthusiastically talking with the head transplant surgeon , and i asked him if i needed a transplant , what i could do to prepare .
he said , " be happy .
a happy patient is a healthy patient . "
it was like in one verbal swoop he had channeled my thoughts on life and medicine and confucius .
i still did n't want a transplant , but in a month , i was back in the hospital with some severely edemic kankles -- very attractive .
and it was right - heart failure .
i finally decided it was time to take my doctor 's advice .
it was time for me to go to cleveland and to start the agonizing wait for a match .
but the next morning , while i was still in the hospital , i got a telephone call .
it was my doctor in cleveland , marie budev .
and they had lungs .
it was a match .
they were from texas .
and everybody was really happy for me , but me .
because , despite their problems , i had spent my whole life training my lungs , and i was not particularly enthusiastic about giving them up .
i flew to cleveland , and my family rushed there in hopes that they would meet me and say what we knew might be our final goodbye .
but organs do n't wait , and i went into surgery before i could say goodbye .
the last thing i remember was lying on a white blanket , telling my surgeon that i needed to see my mother again , and to please try and save my voice .
i fell into this apocalyptic dream world .
during the thirteen - and - a - half - hour surgery , i flatlined twice , 40 quarts of blood were infused into my body .
and in my surgeon 's 20 - year career , he said it was among the most difficult transplants that he 's ever performed .
they left my chest open for two weeks .
you could see my over - sized heart beating inside of it .
i was on a dozen machines that were keeping me alive .
an infection ravaged my skin .
i had hoped my voice would be saved , but my doctors knew that the breathing tubes going down my throat might have already destroyed it .
if they stayed in , there was no way i would ever sing again .
so my doctor got the ent , the top guy at the clinic , to come down and give me surgery to move the tubes around my voice box .
he said it would kill me .
so my own surgeon performed the procedure in a last - ditch attempt to save my voice .
though my mom could n't say goodbye to me before the surgery , she did n't leave my side in the months of recovery that followed .
and if you want an example of perseverance , grit and strength in a beautiful , little package , it is her .
one year ago to this very day , i woke up .
i was 95 lbs.
there were a dozen tubes coming in and out of my body .
i could n't walk , i could n't talk , i could n't eat , i could n't move , i certainly could n't sing , i could n't even breathe , but when i looked up and i saw my mother , i could n't help but smile .
whether by a mack truck or by heart failure or faulty lungs , death happens .
but life is n't really just about avoiding death , is it ?
it 's about living .
medical conditions do n't negate the human condition .
and when people are allowed to pursue their passions , doctors will find they have better , happier and healthier patients .
my parents were totally stressed out about me going and auditioning and traveling and performing all over the place , but they knew that it was much better for me to do that than be preoccupied with my own mortality all of the time .
and i 'm so grateful they did .
this past summer , when i was running and singing and dancing and playing with my nieces and my nephews and my brothers and my sisters and my mother and my grandmother in the colorado rockies , i could n't help but think of that doctor who told me that i could n't sing .
and i wanted to tell her , and i want to tell you , we need to stop letting disease divorce us from our dreams .
when we do , we will find that patients do n't just survive ; we thrive .
and some of us might even sing .
[ singing : french ] thank you .
thank you .
and i 'd like to thank my pianist , monica lee .
thank you so much .
thank you .
