i normally teach courses on how to rebuild states after war .
but today i 've got a personal story to share with you .
this is a picture of my family , my four siblings -- my mom and i -- taken in 1977 .
and we 're actually cambodians .
and this picture is taken in vietnam .
so how did a cambodian family end up in vietnam in 1977 ?
well to explain that , i 've got a short video clip to explain the khmer rouge regime during 1975 and 1979 .
video : april 17th , 1975 .
the communist khmer rouge enters phnom penh to liberate their people from the encroaching conflict in vietnam , and american bombing campaigns .
led by peasant - born pol pot , the khmer rouge evacuates people to the countryside in order to create a rural communist utopia , much like mao tse - tung 's cultural revolution in china .
the khmer rouge closes the doors to the outside world .
but after four years the grim truth seeps out .
in a country of only seven million people , one and a half million were murdered by their own leaders , their bodies piled in the mass graves of the killing fields .
sophal ear : so , notwithstanding the 1970s narration , on april 17th 1975 we lived in phnom penh .
and my parents were told by the khmer rouge to evacuate the city because of impending american bombing for three days .
and here is a picture of the khmer rouge .
they were young soldiers , typically child soldiers .
and this is very normal now , of modern day conflict , because they 're easy to bring into wars .
the reason that they gave about american bombing was n't all that far off .
i mean , from 1965 to 1973 there were more munitions that fell on cambodia than in all of world war ii japan , including the two nuclear bombs of august 1945 .
the khmer rouge did n't believe in money .
so the equivalent of the federal reserve bank in cambodia was bombed .
but not just that , they actually banned money .
i think it 's the only precedent in which money has ever been stopped from being used .
and we know money is the root of all evil , but it did n't actually stop evil from happening in cambodia , in fact .
my family was moved from phnom penh to pursat province .
this is a picture of what pursat looks like .
it 's actually a very pretty area of cambodia , where rice growing takes place .
and in fact they were forced to work the fields .
so my father and mother ended up in a sort of concentration camp , labor camp .
and it was at that time that my mother got word from the commune chief that the vietnamese were actually asking for their citizens to go back to vietnam .
and she spoke some vietnamese , as a child having grown up with vietnamese friends .
and she decided , despite the advice of her neighbors , that she would take the chance and claim to be vietnamese so that we could have a chance to survive , because at this point they 're forcing everybody to work .
and they 're giving about -- in a modern - day , caloric - restriction diet , i guess -- they 're giving porridge , with a few grains of rice .
and at about this time actually my father got very sick .
and he did n't speak vietnamese .
so he died actually , in january 1976 .
and it made it possible , in fact , for us to take on this plan .
so the khmer rouge took us from a place called pursat to kaoh tiev , which is across from the border from vietnam .
and there they had a detention camp where alleged vietnamese would be tested , language tested .
and my mother 's vietnamese was so bad that to make our story more credible , she 'd given all the boys and girls new vietnamese names .
but she 'd given the boys girls ' names , and the girls boys ' names .
and it was n't until she met a vietnamese lady who told her this , and then tutored her for two days intensively , that she was able to go into her exam and -- you know , this was a moment of truth .
if she fails , we 're all headed to the gallows ; if she passes , we can leave to vietnam .
and she actually , of course -- i 'm here , she passes .
and we end up in hong ngu on the vietnamese side .
and then onwards to chau doc .
and this is a picture of hong ngu , vietnam today .
a pretty idyllic place on the mekong delta .
but for us it meant freedom .
and freedom from persecution from the khmer rouge .
last year , the khmer rouge tribunal , which the u.n. is helping cambodia take on , started , and i decided that as a matter of record i should file a civil complaint with the tribunal about my father 's passing away .
and i got word last month that the complaint was officially accepted by the khmer rouge tribunal .
and it 's for me a matter of justice for history , and accountability for the future , because cambodia remains a pretty lawless place , at times .
five years ago my mother and i went back to chau doc .
and she was able to return to a place that for her meant freedom , but also fear , because we had just come out of cambodia .
i 'm happy , actually , today , to present her .
she 's here today with us in the audience .
thank you mother .
