you may have heard about the koran 's idea of paradise being 72 virgins , and i promise i will come back to those virgins .
but in fact , here in the northwest , we 're living very close to the real koranic idea of paradise , defined 36 times as " gardens watered by running streams . "
since i live on a houseboat on the running stream of lake union , this makes perfect sense to me .
but the thing is , how come it 's news to most people ?
i know many well - intentioned non - muslims who 've begun reading the koran , but given up , disconcerted by its " otherness . "
the historian thomas carlyle considered muhammad one of the world 's greatest heroes , yet even he called the koran " as toilsome reading as i ever undertook , a wearisome , confused jumble . "
part of the problem , i think , is that we imagine that the koran can be read as we usually read a book -- as though we can curl up with it on a rainy afternoon with a bowl of popcorn within reach , as though god -- and the koran is entirely in the voice of god speaking to muhammad -- were just another author on the bestseller list .
yet the fact that so few people do actually read the koran is precisely why it 's so easy to quote -- that is , to misquote .
phrases and snippets taken out of context in what i call the " highlighter version , " which is the one favored by both muslim fundamentalists and anti - muslim islamophobes .
so this past spring , as i was gearing up to begin writing a biography of muhammad , i realized i needed to read the koran properly -- as properly as i could , that is .
my arabic 's reduced by now to wielding a dictionary , so i took four well - known translations and decided to read them side - by - side , verse - by - verse along with a transliteration and the original seventh - century arabic .
now i did have an advantage .
my last book was about the story behind the shi'a - sunni split , and for that i 'd worked closely with the earliest islamic histories , so i knew the events to which the koran constantly refers , its frame of reference .
i knew enough , that is , to know that i 'd be a tourist in the koran -- an informed one , an experienced one even , but still an outsider , an agnostic jew reading some else 's holy book .
so i read slowly .
i 'd set aside three weeks for this project , and that , i think , is what is meant by " hubris " -- -- because it turned out to be three months .
i did resist the temptation to skip to the back where the shorter and more clearly mystical chapters are .
but every time i thought i was beginning to get a handle on the koran -- that feeling of " i get it now " -- it would slip away overnight , and i 'd come back in the morning wondering if i was n't lost in a strange land , and yet the terrain was very familiar .
the koran declares that it comes to renew the message of the torah and the gospels .
so one - third of it reprises the stories of biblical figures like abraham , moses , joseph , mary , jesus .
god himself was utterly familiar from his earlier manifestation as yahweh -- jealously insisting on no other gods .
the presence of camels , mountains , desert wells and springs took me back to the year i spent wandering the sinai desert .
and then there was the language , the rhythmic cadence of it , reminding me of evenings spent listening to bedouin elders recite hours - long narrative poems entirely from memory .
and i began to grasp why it 's said that the koran is really the koran only in arabic .
take the fatihah , the seven - verse opening chapter that is the lord 's prayer and the shema yisrael of islam combined .
it 's just 29 words in arabic , but anywhere from 65 to 72 in translation .
and yet the more you add , the more seems to go missing .
the arabic has an incantatory , almost hypnotic , quality that begs to be heard rather than read , felt more than analyzed .
it wants to be chanted out loud , to sound its music in the ear and on the tongue .
so the koran in english is a kind of shadow of itself , or as arthur arberry called his version , " an interpretation . "
but all is not lost in translation .
as the koran promises , patience is rewarded , and there are many surprises -- a degree of environmental awareness , for instance , and of humans as mere stewards of god 's creation , unmatched in the bible .
and where the bible is addressed exclusively to men , using the second and third person masculine , the koran includes women -- talking , for instance , of believing men and believing women , honorable men and honorable women .
or take the infamous verse about killing the unbelievers .
yes , it does say that , but in a very specific context : the anticipated conquest of the sanctuary city of mecca where fighting was usually forbidden , and the permission comes hedged about with qualifiers .
not " you must kill unbelievers in mecca , " but you can , you are allowed to , but only after a grace period is over and only if there 's no other pact in place and only if they try to stop you getting to the kaaba , and only if they attack you first .
and even then -- god is merciful ; forgiveness is supreme -- and so , essentially , better if you do n't .
this was perhaps the biggest surprise -- how flexible the koran is , at least in minds that are not fundamentally inflexible .
" some of these verses are definite in meaning , " it says , " and others are ambiguous . "
the perverse at heart will seek out the ambiguities , trying to create discord by pinning down meanings of their own .
only god knows the true meaning .
the phrase " god is subtle " appears again and again , and indeed , the whole of the koran is far more subtle than most of us have been led to believe .
as in , for instance , that little matter of virgins and paradise .
old - fashioned orientalism comes into play here .
the word used four times is houris , rendered as dark - eyed maidens with swelling breasts , or as fair , high - bosomed virgins .
yet all there is in the original arabic is that one word : houris .
not a swelling breast nor a high bosom in sight .
now this may be a way of saying " pure beings " -- like in angels -- or it may be like the greek kouros or kórē , an eternal youth .
but the truth is nobody really knows , and that 's the point .
because the koran is quite clear when it says that you 'll be " a new creation in paradise " and that you will be " recreated in a form unknown to you , " which seems to me a far more appealing prospect than a virgin .
and that number 72 never appears .
there are no 72 virgins in the koran .
that idea only came into being 300 years later , and most islamic scholars see it as the equivalent of people with wings sitting on clouds and strumming harps .
paradise is quite the opposite .
it 's not virginity ; it 's fecundity .
it 's plenty .
it 's gardens watered by running streams .
thank you .
