thank you so much everyone from ted , and chris and amy in particular .
i cannot believe i 'm here .
i have not slept in weeks .
neil and i were sitting there comparing how little we 've slept in anticipation for this . i 've never been so nervous -- and i do this when i 'm nervous , i just realized .
so , i 'm going to talk about sort of what we did at this organization called 826 valencia , and then i 'm going to talk about how we all might join in and do similar things .
back in about 2000 , i was living in brooklyn , i was trying to finish my first book , i was wandering around dazed every day because i wrote from 12 a.m. to 5 a.m.
so i would walk around in a daze during the day .
i had no mental acuity to speak of during the day , but i had flexible hours .
in the brooklyn neighborhood that i lived in , park slope , there are a lot of writers -- it 's like a very high per capita ratio of writers to normal people .
meanwhile , i had grown up around a lot of teachers .
my mom was a teacher , my sister became a teacher and after college so many of my friends went into teaching .
and so i was always hearing them talk about their lives and how inspiring they were , and they were really sort of the most hard - working and constantly inspiring people i knew .
but i knew so many of the things they were up against , so many of the struggles they were dealing with .
and one of them was that so many of my friends that were teaching in city schools were having trouble with their students keeping up at grade level , in their reading and writing in particular .
now , so many of these students had come from households where english is n't spoken in the home , where a lot of them have different special needs , learning disabilities . and of course they 're working in schools which sometimes and very often are under - funded .
and so they would talk to me about this and say , " you know , what we really need is just more people , more bodies , more one - on - one attention , more hours , more expertise from people that have skills in english and can work with these students one - on - one . "
now , i would say , " well , why do n't you just work with them one - on - one ? "
and they would say , " well , we have five classes of 30 to 40 students each .
this can lead up to 150 , 180 , 200 students a day .
how can we possibly give each student even one hour a week of one - on - one attention ? "
you 'd have to greatly multiply the workweek and clone the teachers .
and so we started talking about this .
and at the same time , i thought about this massive group of people i knew : writers , editors , journalists , graduate students , assistant professors , you name it .
all these people that had sort of flexible daily hours and an interest in the english word -- i hope to have an interest in the english language , but i 'm not speaking it well right now .
i 'm trying . that clock has got me .
but everyone that i knew had an interest in the primacy of the written word in terms of nurturing a democracy , nurturing an enlightened life .
and so they had , you know , their time and their interest , but at the same time there was n't a conduit that i knew of in my community to bring these two communities together .
so when i moved back to san francisco , we rented this building .
and the idea was to put mcsweeney 's -- mcsweeney 's quarterly , that we published twice or three times a year , and a few other magazines -- we were going to move it into an office for the first time .
it used to be in my kitchen in brooklyn .
we were going to move it into an office , and we were going to actually share space with a tutoring center .
so we thought , " we 'll have all these writers and editors and everybody -- sort of a writing community -- coming into the office every day anyway , why do n't we just open up the front of the building for students to come in there after school , get extra help on their written homework , so you have basically no border between these two communities ? "
so the idea was that we would be working on whatever we 're working on , at 2:30 p.m. the students flow in and you put down what you 're doing , or you trade , or you work a little bit later or whatever it is .
you give those hours in the afternoon to the students in the neighborhood .
so , we had this place , we rented it , the landlord was all for it . we did this mural , that 's a chris ware mural , that basically explains the entire history of the printed word , in mural form -- it takes a long time to digest and you have to stand in the middle of the road .
so we rented this space .
and everything was great except the landlord said , " well , the space is zoned for retail ; you have to come up with something .
you 've gotta sell something .
you ca n't just have a tutoring center . "
so we thought , " ha ha ! really ! "
and we could n't think of anything necessarily to sell , but we did all the necessary research .
it used to be a weight room , so there were rubber floors below , acoustic tile ceilings and fluorescent lights .
we took all that down , and we found beautiful wooden floors , whitewashed beams and it had the look -- while we were renovating this place , somebody said , " you know , it really kind of looks like the hull of a ship . "
and we looked around and somebody else said , " well , you should sell supplies to the working buccaneer . "
and so this is what we did . so it made everybody laugh , and we said , " there 's a point to that .
let 's sell pirate supplies . " this is the pirate supply store .
you see , this is sort of a sketch i did on a napkin .
a great carpenter built all this stuff and you see , we made it look sort of pirate supply - like .
here you see planks sold by the foot and we have supplies to combat scurvy .
we have the peg legs there , that are all handmade and fitted to you .
up at the top , you see the eyepatch display , which is the black column there for everyday use for your eyepatch , and then you have the pastel and other colors for stepping out at night -- special occasions , bar mitzvahs and whatever .
so we opened this place . and this is a vat that we fill with treasures that students dig in .
this is replacement eyes in case you lose one .
these are some signs that we have all over the place : " practical joking with pirates . "
while you 're reading the sign , we pull a rope behind the counter and eight mop heads drop on your head .
that was just my one thing -- i said we had to have something that drops on people 's heads .
it became mop heads . and this is the fish theater , which is just a saltwater tank with three seats , and then right behind it we set up this space , which was the tutoring center .
so right there is the tutoring center , and then behind the curtain were the mcsweeney 's offices , where all of us would be working on the magazine and book editing and things like that .
the kids would come in -- or we thought they would come in . i should back up .
we set the place up , we opened up , we spent months and months renovating this place .
we had tables , chairs , computers , everything .
i went to a dot - com auction at a holiday inn in palo alto and i bought 11 g 4s with a stroke of a paddle .
anyway , we bought ' em , we set everything up and then we waited .
it was started with about 12 of my friends , people that i had known for years that were writers in the neighborhood .
and we sat. and at 2:30 p.m. we put a sandwich board out on the front sidewalk and it just said , " free tutoring for your english - related and writing - related needs -- just come in , it 's all free . "
and we thought , " oh , they 're going to storm the gates , they 're gonna love it . " and they did n't .
and so we waited , we sat at the tables , we waited and waited .
and everybody was becoming very discouraged because it was weeks and weeks that we waited , really , where nobody came in .
and then somebody alerted us to the fact that maybe there was a trust gap , because we were operating behind a pirate supply store .
we never put it together , you know ?
and so then , around that time , i persuaded a woman named nineveh caligari , a longtime san francisco educator -- she was teaching in mexico city , she had all the experience necessary , knew everything about education , was connected with all the teachers and community members in the neighborhood -- i convinced her to move up from mexico city where she was teaching .
she took over as executive director .
immediately , she made the inroads with the teachers and the parents and the students and everything , and so suddenly it was actually full every day .
and what we were trying to offer every day was one - on - one attention .
the goal was to have a one - to - one ratio with every one of these students .
you know , it 's been proven that 35 to 40 hours a year with one - on - one attention , a student can get one grade level higher .
and so most of these students , english is not spoken in the home .
they come there , many times their parents -- you ca n't see it , but there 's a church pew that i bought in a berkeley auction right there -- the parents will sometimes watch while their kids are being tutored .
so that was the basis of it , was one - on - one attention .
and we found ourselves full every day with kids .
if you 're on valencia street within those few blocks at around 2 p.m. , 2:30 p.m. , you will get run over , often , by the kids and their big backpacks , or whatever , actually running to this space , which is very strange , because it 's school , in a way .
but there was something psychological happening there that was just a little bit different .
and the other thing was , there was no stigma .
kids were n't going into the " center - for - kids - that - need - more - help , " or something like that . it was 826 valencia .
first of all , it was a pirate supply store , which is insane .
and then secondly , there 's a publishing company in the back .
and so our interns were actually working at the same tables very often , and shoulder - to - shoulder , computer - next - to - computer with the students .
and so it became a tutoring center -- publishing center , is what we called it -- and a writing center .
they go in , and they might be working with a high school student actually working on a novel -- because we had very gifted kids , too .
so there 's no stigma .
they 're all working next to each other . it 's all a creative endeavor .
they 're seeing adults . they 're modeling their behavior .
these adults , they 're working in their field .
they can lean over , ask a question of one of these adults and it all sort of feeds on each other .
there 's a lot of cross - pollination . the only problem , especially for the adults working at mcsweeney 's who had n't necessarily bought into all of this when they signed up , was that there was just the one bathroom .
with like 60 kids a day , this is a problem .
but you know , there 's something about the kids finishing their homework in a given day , working one - on - one , getting all this attention -- they go home , they 're finished . they do n't stall .
they do n't do their homework in front of the tv .
they 're allowed to go home at 5:30 p.m. , enjoy their family , enjoy other hobbies , get outside , play .
and that makes a happy family .
a bunch of happy families in a neighborhood is a happy community .
a bunch of happy communities tied together is a happy city and a happy world .
so the key to it all is homework !
there you have it , you know -- one - on - one attention .
so we started off with about 12 volunteers , and then we had about 50 , and then a couple hundred .
and we now have 1,400 volunteers on our roster .
and we make it incredibly easy to volunteer .
the key thing is , even if you only have a couple of hours a month , those two hours shoulder - to - shoulder , next to one student , concentrated attention , shining this beam of light on their work , on their thoughts and their self - expression , is going to be absolutely transformative , because so many of the students have not had that ever before .
so we said , " even if you have two hours one sunday every six months , it does n't matter . that 's going to be enough . "
so that 's partly why the tutor corps grew so fast .
then we said , " well , what are we going to do with the space during the day , because it has to be used before 2:30 p.m. ? "
so we started bringing in classes during the day .
so every day , there 's a field trip where they together create a book -- you can see it being typed up above .
this is one of the classes getting way too excited about writing .
you just point a camera at a class , and it always looks like this .
so this is one of the books that they do .
notice the title of the book , " the book that was never checked out : titanic . "
and the first line of that book is , " once there was a book named cindy that was about the titanic . "
so , meanwhile , there 's an adult in the back typing this up , taking it completely seriously , which blows their mind .
so then we still had more tutors to use .
this is a shot of just some of the tutors during one of the events .
the teachers that we work with -- and everything is different to teachers -- they tell us what to do .
we went in there thinking , " we 're ultimately , completely malleable . you 're going to tell us .
the neighborhood 's going to tell us , the parents are going to tell us .
the teachers are going to tell us how we 're most useful . "
so then they said , " why do n't you come into the schools ?
because what about the students that would n't come to you , necessarily , who do n't have really active parents that are bringing them in , or are n't close enough ? " so then we started saying , " well , we 've got 1,400 people on our tutor roster .
let 's just put out the word . " a teacher will say , " i need 12 tutors for the next five sundays .
we 're working on our college essays . send them in . "
so we put that out on the wire : 1,400 tutors .
whoever can make it signs up . they go in about a half an hour before the class .
the teacher tells them what to do , how to do it , what their training is , what their project is so far .
they work under the teacher 's guide , and it 's all in one big room .
and that 's actually the brunt of what we do is , people going straight from their workplace , straight from home , straight into the classroom and working directly with the students .
so then we 're able to work with thousands and thousands of more students .
then another school said , " well , what if we just give you a classroom and you can staff it all day ? "
so this is the everett middle school writers ' room , where we decorated it in buccaneer style .
it 's right off the library . and there we serve all 529 kids in this middle school .
this is their newspaper , the " straight - up news , " that has an ongoing column from mayor gavin newsom in both languages -- english and spanish .
so then one day isabel allende wrote to us and said , " hey , why do n't you assign a book with high school students ?
i want them to write about how to achieve peace in a violent world . "
and so we went into thurgood marshall high school , which is a school that we had worked with on some other things , and we gave that assignment to the students .
and we said , " isabel allende is going to read all your essays at the end .
she 's going to publish them in a book .
she 's going to sponsor the printing of this book in paperback form .
it 's going to be available in all the bookstores in the bay area and throughout the world , on amazon and you name it . "
so these kids worked harder than they 've ever worked on anything in their lives , because there was that outside audience , there was isabel allende on the other end .
i think we had about 170 tutors that worked on this book with them and so this worked out incredibly well .
we had a big party at the end .
this is a book that you can find anywhere . so that led to a series of these .
you can see amy tan sponsored the next one , " i might get somewhere . "
and this became an ongoing thing . more and more books .
now we 're sort of addicted to the book thing .
the kids will work harder than they 've ever worked in their life if they know it 's going to be permanent , know it 's going to be on a shelf , know that nobody can diminish what they 've thought and said , that we 've honored their words , honored their thoughts with hundreds of hours of five drafts , six drafts -- all this attention that we give to their thoughts .
and once they achieve that level , once they 've written at that level , they can never go back .
it 's absolutely transformative .
and so then they 're all sold in the store . this is near the planks .
we sell all the student books .
where else would you put them , right ?
so we sell ' em , and then something weird had been happening with the stores . the store , actually -- even though we started out as just a gag -- the store actually made money .
so it was paying the rent .
and maybe this is just a san francisco thing -- i do n't know , i do n't want to judge .
but people would come in -- and this was before the pirate movies and everything !
it was making a lot of money . not a lot of money , but it was paying the rent , paying a full - time staff member there .
there 's the ocean maps you can see on the left .
and it became a gateway to the community .
people would come in and say , " what the - - ?
what is this ? " i do n't want to swear on the web .
is that a rule ? i do n't know .
they would say , " what is this ? "
and people would come in and learn more about it .
and then right beyond -- there 's usually a little chain there -- right beyond , they would see the kids being tutored .
this is a field trip going on . and so they would be shopping , and they might be more likely to buy some lard , or millet for their parrot , or , you know , a hook , or hook protector for nighttime , all of these things we sell .
so the store actually did really well .
but it brought in so many people -- teachers , donors , volunteers , everybody -- because it was street level . it was open to the public .
it was n't a non - profit buried , you know , on the 30th floor of some building downtown . it was right in the neighborhood that it was serving , and it was open all the time to the public .
so , it became this sort of weird , happy accident .
so all the people i used to know in brooklyn , they said , " well , why do n't we have a place like that here ? "
and a lot of them had been former educators or would - be educators , so they combined with a lot of local designers , local writers , and they just took the idea independently and they did their own thing .
they did n't want to sell pirate supplies .
they did n't think that that was going to work there .
so , knowing the crime - fighting community in new york , they opened the brooklyn superhero supply company .
this is sam potts ' great design that did this .
and this was to make it look sort of like one of those keysmith 's shops that has to have every service they 've ever offered , you know , all over there .
so they opened this place . inside , it 's like a costco for superheroes -- all the supplies in kind of basic form .
these are all handmade .
these are all sort of repurposed other products , or whatever .
all the packaging is done by sam potts .
so then you have the villain containment unit , where kids put their parents . you have the office .
this is a little vault -- you have to put your product in there , it goes up an electric lift and then the guy behind the counter tells you that you have to recite the vow of heroism , which you do , if you want to buy anything . and it limits , really , their sales .
personally , i think it 's a problem .
because they have to do it hand on heart and everything .
these are some of the products . these are all handmade .
this is a secret identity kit .
if you want to take on the identity of sharon boone , one american female marketing executive from hoboken , new jersey . it 's a full dossier on everything you would need to know about sharon boone .
so , this is the capery where you get fitted for your cape , and then you walk up these three steel - graded steps and then we turn on three hydraulic fans from every side and then you can see the cape in action .
there 's nothing worse than , you know , getting up there and the cape is bunching up or something like that .
so then , the secret door -- this is one of the shelves you do n't see when you walk in , but it slowly opens .
you can see it there in the middle next to all the grappling hooks .
it opens and then this is the tutoring center in the back .
so you can see the full effect !
but this is -- i just want to emphasize -- locally funded , locally built .
all the designers , all of the builders , everybody was local , all the time was pro - bono .
i just came and visited and said , " yes , you guys are doing great , " or whatever . that was it . you can see the time in all five boroughs of new york in the back .
so this is the space during tutoring hours .
it 's very busy . same principles : one - on - one attention , complete devotion to the students ' work and a boundless optimism and sort of a possibility of creativity and ideas .
and this switch is flicked in their heads when they walk through those 18 feet of this bizarre store , right ?
so it 's school , but it 's not school .
it 's clearly not school , even though they 're working shoulder - to - shoulder on tables , pencils and papers , whatever .
this is one of the students , khaled hamdan .
you can read this quote .
addicted to video games and tv . could n't concentrate at home .
came in . got this concentrated attention .
and he could n't escape it .
so , soon enough , he was writing . he would finish his homework early -- got really addicted to finishing his homework early .
it 's an addictive thing to sort of be done with it , and to have it checked , and to know he 's going to achieve the next thing and be prepared for school the next day .
so he got hooked on that , and then he started doing other things .
he 's now been published in five books .
he co - wrote a mockumentary about failed superheroes called " super - has - beens . "
he wrote a series on " penguin balboa , " which is a fighting -- a boxing -- penguin .
and then he read aloud just a few weeks ago to 500 people at symphony space , at a benefit for 826 new york . so he 's there every day .
he 's evangelical about it . he brings his cousins in now .
there 's four family members that come in every day .
so , i 'll go through really quickly .
this is l.a. , the echo park time travel mart : " whenever you are , we 're already then . "
this is sort of a 7 - eleven for time travelers .
so you see everything : it 's exactly as a 7 - eleven would be .
leeches . mammoth chunks . they even have their own slurpee machine : " out of order . come back yesterday . "
anyway . so i 'm going to jump ahead .
these are spaces that are only affiliated with us , doing this same thing : word st. in pittsfield , massachusetts ; ink spot in cincinnati ; youth speaks , san francisco , california , which inspired us ; studio st. louis in st. louis ; austin bat cave in austin ; fighting words in dublin , ireland , started by roddy doyle , this will be open in april .
now i 'm going to the ted wish -- is that okay ?
all right , i 've got a minute . so , the ted wish : i wish that you -- you personally and every creative individual and organization you know -- will find a way to directly engage with a public school in your area and that you 'll then tell the story of how you got involved , so that within a year we have a thousand examples -- a thousand ! -- of transformative partnerships .
profound leaps forward !
and these can be things that maybe you 're already doing .
i know that so many people in this room are already doing really interesting things .
i know that for a fact . so , tell us these stories and inspire others on the website .
we created a website .
i 'm going to switch to " we , " and not " i , " hope : we hope that the attendees of this conference will usher in a new era of participation in our public schools .
we hope that you will take the lead in partnering your innovative spirit and expertise with that of innovative educators in your community .
always let the teachers lead the way .
they will tell you how to be useful . i hope that you 'll step in and help out .
there are a million ways .
you can walk up to your local school and consult with the teachers . they 'll always tell you how to help .
so , this is with hot studio in san francisco , they did this phenomenal job .
this website is already up , it 's already got a bunch of stories , a lot of ideas . it 's called " once upon a school , " which is a great title , i think .
this site will document every story , every project that comes out of this conference and around the world . so you go to the website , you see a bunch of ideas you can be inspired by and then you add your own projects once you get started .
hot studio did a great job in a very tight deadline . so , visit the site .
if you have any questions , you can ask this guy , who 's our director of national programs . he 'll be on the phone .
you email him , he 'll answer any question you possibly want .
and he 'll get you inspired and get you going and guide you through the process so that you can affect change .
and it can be fun ! that 's the point of this talk -- it need n't be sterile . it need n't be bureaucratically untenable .
you can do and use the skills that you have .
the schools need you . the teachers need you .
students and parents need you . they need your actual person : your physical personhood and your open minds and open ears and boundless compassion , sitting next to them , listening and nodding and asking questions for hours at a time .
some of these kids just do n't plain know how good they are : how smart and how much they have to say .
you can tell them . you can shine that light on them , one human interaction at a time . so we hope you 'll join us .
thank you so much .
