let me share with you today an original discovery .
but i want to tell it to you the way it really happened -- not the way i present it in a scientific meeting , or the way you 'd read it in a scientific paper .
it 's a story about beyond biomimetics , to something i 'm calling biomutualism .
i define that as an association between biology and another discipline , where each discipline reciprocally advances the other , but where the collective discoveries that emerge are beyond any single field .
now , in terms of biomimetics , as human technologies take on more of the characteristics of nature , nature becomes a much more useful teacher .
engineering can be inspired by biology by using its principles and analogies when they 're advantageous , but then integrating that with the best human engineering , ultimately to make something actually better than nature .
now , being a biologist , i was very curious about this .
these are gecko toes .
and we wondered how they use these bizarre toes to climb up a wall so quickly .
we discovered it . and what we found was that they have leaf - like structures on their toes , with millions of tiny hairs that look like a rug , and each of those hairs has the worst case of split - ends possible : about 100 to 1000 split ends that are nano - size .
and the individual has 2 billion of these nano - size split ends .
they do n't stick by velcro or suction or glue .
they actually stick by intermolecular forces alone , van der waals forces .
and i 'm really pleased to report to you today that the first synthetic self - cleaning , dry adhesive has been made .
from the simplest version in nature , one branch , my engineering collaborator , ron fearing , at berkeley , had made the first synthetic version .
and so has my other incredible collaborator , mark cutkosky , at stanford -- he made much larger hairs than the gecko , but used the same general principles .
and here is its first test .
that 's kellar autumn , my former ph.d. student , professor now at lewis and clark , literally giving his first - born child up for this test .
more recently , this happened .
man : this the first time someone has actually climbed with it .
narrator : lynn verinsky , a professional climber , who appeared to be brimming with confidence .
lynn verinsky : honestly , it 's going to be perfectly safe . it will be perfectly safe .
man : how do you know ?
lynn verinsky : because of liability insurance .
narrator : with a mattress below and attached to a safety rope , lynn began her 60 - foot ascent .
lynn made it to the top in a perfect pairing of hollywood and science .
man : so you 're the first human being to officially emulate a gecko .
lynn verinsky : ha ! wow . and what a privilege that has been .
robert full : that 's what she did on rough surfaces .
but she actually used these on smooth surfaces -- two of them -- to climb up , and pull herself up .
and you can try this in the lobby , and look at the gecko - inspired material .
now the problem with the robots doing this is that they ca n't get unstuck , with the material .
this is the gecko 's solution . they actually peel their toes away from the surface , at high rates , as they run up the wall .
well i 'm really excited today to show you the newest version of a robot , stickybot , using a new hierarchical dry adhesive .
here is the actual robot .
and here is what it does .
and if you look , you can see that it uses the toe peeling , just like the gecko does .
if we can show some of the video , you can see it climbing up the wall .
there it is .
and now it can go on other surfaces because of the new adhesive that the stanford group was able to do in designing this incredible robot .
oh . one thing i want to point out is , look at stickybot .
you see something on it . it 's not just to look like a gecko .
it has a tail . and just when you think you 've figured out nature , this kind of thing happens .
the engineers told us , for the climbing robots , that , if they do n't have a tail , they fall off the wall .
so what they did was they asked us an important question .
they said , " well , it kind of looks like a tail . "
even though we put a passive bar there .
" do animals use their tails when they climb up walls ? "
what they were doing was returning the favor , by giving us a hypothesis to test , in biology , that we would n't have thought of .
so of course , in reality , we were then panicked , being the biologists , and we should know this already .
we said , " well , what do tails do ? "
well we know that tails store fat , for example .
we know that you can grab onto things with them .
and perhaps it is most well known that they provide static balance .
it can also act as a counterbalance .
so watch this kangaroo .
see that tail ? that 's incredible !
marc raibert built a uniroo hopping robot .
and it was unstable without its tail .
now mostly tails limit maneuverability , like this human inside this dinosaur suit .
my colleagues actually went on to test this limitation , by increasing the moment of inertia of a student , so they had a tail , and running them through and obstacle course , and found a decrement in performance , like you 'd predict .
but of course , this is a passive tail .
and you can also have active tails .
and when i went back to research this , i realized that one of the great ted moments in the past , from nathan , we 've talked about an active tail .
video : myhrvold thinks tail - cracking dinosaurs were interested in love , not war .
robert full : he talked about the tail being a whip for communication .
it can also be used in defense .
pretty powerful .
so we then went back and looked at the animal .
and we ran it up a surface .
but this time what we did is we put a slippery patch that you see in yellow there .
and watch on the right what the animal is doing with its tail when it slips . this is slowed down 10 times .
so here is normal speed .
and watch it now slip , and see what it does with its tail .
it has an active tail that functions as a fifth leg , and it contributes to stability .
if you make it slip a huge amount , this is what we discovered .
this is incredible .
the engineers had a really good idea .
and then of course we wondered , okay , they have an active tail , but let 's picture them .
they 're climbing up a wall , or a tree .
and they get to the top and let 's say there 's some leaves there .
and what would happen if they climbed on the underside of that leaf , and there was some wind , or we shook it ?
and we did that experiment , that you see here .
and this is what we discovered .
now that 's real time . you ca n't see anything .
but there it is slowed down .
what we discovered was the world 's fastest air - righting response .
for those of you who remember your physics , that 's a zero - angular - momentum righting response . but it 's like a cat .
you know , cats falling . cats do this . they twist their bodies .
but geckos do it better .
and they do it with their tail .
so they do it with this active tail as they swing around .
and then they always land in the sort of superman skydiving posture .
okay , now we wondered , if we were right , we should be able to test this in a physical model , in a robot .
so for ted we actually built a robot , over there , a prototype , with the tail .
and we 're going to attempt the first air - righting response in a tail , with a robot .
if we could have the lights on it .
okay , there it goes .
and show the video .
there it is .
and it works just like it does in the animal .
so all you need is a swing of the tail to right yourself .
now , of course , we were normally frightened because the animal has no gliding adaptations , so we thought , " oh that 's okay . we 'll put it in a vertical wind tunnel .
we 'll blow the air up , we 'll give it a landing target , a tree trunk , just outside the plexi - glass enclosure , and see what it does .
so we did . and here is what it does .
so the wind is coming from the bottom . this is slowed down 10 times .
it does an equilibrium glide . highly controlled .
this is sort of incredible . but actually it 's quite beautiful , when you take a picture of it .
and it 's better than that , it -- just in the slide -- maneuvers in mid - air .
and the way it does it , is it takes its tail and it swings it one way to yaw left , and it swings its other way to yaw right .
so we can maneuver this way .
and then -- we had to film this several times to believe this -- it also does this . watch this .
it oscillates its tail up and down like a dolphin .
it can actually swim through the air .
but watch its front legs . can you see what they are doing ?
what does that mean for the origin of flapping flight ?
maybe it 's evolved from coming down from trees , and trying to control a glide .
stay tuned for that .
so then we wondered , " can they actually maneuver with this ? "
so there is the landing target . could they steer towards it with these capabilities ? here it is in the wind tunnel .
and it certainly looks like it .
you can see it even better from down on top .
watch the animal .
definitely moving towards the landing target .
watch the whip of its tail as it does it . look at that .
it 's unbelievable .
so now we were really confused , because there are no reports of it gliding .
so we went , " oh my god , we have to go to the field , and see if it actually does this . "
completely opposite of the way you 'd see it on a nature film , of course .
we wondered , " do they actually glide in nature ? "
well we went to the forests of singapore and southeast asia .
and the next video you see is the first time we 've showed this .
this is the actual video -- not staged , a real research video -- of animal gliding down . there is a red trajectory line .
look at the end to see the animal .
but then as it gets closer to the tree , look at the close - up . and see if you can see it land .
so there it comes down . there is a gecko at the end of that trajectory line .
you see it there ? there ? watch it come down .
now watch up there and you can see the landing . did you see it hit ?
it actually uses its tail too , just like we saw in the lab.
so now we can continue this mutualism by suggesting that they can make an active tail .
and here is the first active tail , in the robot , made by boston dynamics .
so to conclude , i think we need to build biomutualisms , like i showed , that will increase the pace of basic discovery in their application .
to do this though , we need to redesign education in a major way , to balance depth with interdisciplinary communication , and explicitly train people how to contribute to , and benefit from other disciplines .
and of course you need the organisms and the environment to do it .
that is , whether you care about security , search and rescue or health , we must preserve nature 's designs , otherwise these secrets will be lost forever .
and from what i heard from our new president , i 'm very optimistic . thank you .
