chris has been so nice .
i do n't know how you keep it up , chris , i really do n't .
so nice , all week . he 's the kind of man you could say to , " chris , i 'm really sorry , i 've crashed your car .
and it gets worse , i crashed it into your house .
your house has caught fire .
and what 's more , your wife has just run off with your best friend . "
and you know that chris would say , " thank you . "
" thank you for sharing , that 's really interesting . "
" thank you for taking me to a place that i did n't know existed . thank you . "
one of the -- thank you for inviting us .
one of the things about appearing later on in the ted week is that , gradually , as the days go by , all the other speakers cover most of what you were going to say .
nuclear fusion , i had about 10 minutes on that .
spectroscopy , that was another one .
parallel universes .
and so this morning i thought , " oh well , i 'll just do a card trick . "
that one 's gone as well .
and today is emmanuel 's day , i think we 've agreed that , already , have n't we ?
emmanuel ? absolutely .
i was planning on finishing on a dance ...
so , that 's going to look pretty shabby now .
so , what i thought i 'd do is -- in honor of emmanuel -- is , what i can do is to launch today the first ted global auction .
if i could start , this is the enigma decoding machine .
who will start me with $ 1,000 ? anyone ?
thank you . bruno 's face , just then , he said , " no , do n't go through this . do n't , please do n't .
do n't go through this . do n't do it . "
i 'm worried . when i first got the invitation , they said somewhere in the thing , they said , " 15 minutes to change the world , your moment onstage . " 15 minutes to change the world .
i do n't know about you , it takes me 15 minutes to change a plug .
so , the idea of changing the world is really quite an extraordinary one .
well , of course now we know we do n't have to change a plug , now we 've seen that wonderful demonstration of the wireless electric -- fantastic . you know , it inspires us .
300 years ago he 'd have been burnt at the stake for that .
and now it 's an idea .
it 's great . it 's fantastic .
but you do meet some fantastic people , people who look at the world in a totally different way .
yesterday , david deutsch , another one who covered most of what i was going to say .
but when you think of the world in that way , it does make going to starbucks a whole new experience , do n't you think ?
i mean , he must walk in and they will say , " would you like a macchiato , or a latte , or an americano , or a cappuccino ? "
and he 'll say , " you 're offering me things that are infinitely variable . "
" how can your coffee be true ? "
and they will say , " would you mind if i serve the next customer ? "
and elaine morgan yesterday , was n't she wonderful ?
fantastic . really good .
her talk about the aquatic ape , and the link , of course , the link between darwinism and the fact that we are all naked beneath this -- we 're not hirsute and we can swim rather well .
and she said , you know , she 's 90. she 's running out of time , she said .
and she 's desperate to find more evidence for the link .
and i think , " i 'm sitting next to lewis pugh . "
this man has swum around the north pole , what more evidence do you want ?
and there he is .
that 's how ted brings these connections together .
i was n't here on tuesday . i did n't actually see gordon brown 's job application -- um , sorry .
i 'm so sorry .
i 'm so sorry . no , no.
no , no , ahh ...
: " global problems require scottish solutions . "
the problem i have is because gordon brown , he comes onstage and he looks for all the world like a man who 's just taken the head off a bear suit .
: " hello , can i tell you what happened in the woods back there ?
uh , no. "
" i 'm sorry . i 've only got 18 minutes , 18 minutes to talk about saving the world , saving the planet , global institutions .
our work on climate change , i 've only got 18 minutes , unfortunately i 'm not able to tell you about all the wonderful things we 're doing to promote the climate change agenda in great britain , like the third runway we 're planning at heathrow airport . . . "
" the large coal - fired power station we 're building at king 's north , and of course the exciting news that only today , only this week , britain 's only manufacturer of wind turbines has been forced to close .
no time , unfortunately , to mention those . "
" british jobs for scottish people ...
no. "
" christian principles , christian values .
thou shalt not kill , thou shalt not steal , thou shalt not covet thy neighbor 's wife . "
" although to be honest , when i was at number 11 that was never going to be a problem . "
: " yeah , alright , come on , eh .
alright gordon , come on , eh .
i just , can i just say a few things about , first about cherie , because she 's a wonderful lady , my wife , with a wonderful smile .
that reminds me , i must post that letter . "
" i just think , you know , what people forget , gordon and i , we always got on perfectly well .
alright , it was never exactly ' brokeback mountain . ' " " you know , i wrote to him , just before i left office . i said , ' can i rely on your support for the next month ? ' and he wrote back . he said , ' no , you ca n't . ' which kind of surprised me , because i 'd never seen ' ca n't ' spelled that way before . "
another thing gordon could have mentioned in his speech to the mansion house in 2002 -- that was to the building ; the people were n't listening .
but the people , when talking about the finance industry , he said , " what you as the city of london have done for financial services , we , as a government , hope to do for the economy as a whole . "
when you think what 's happened to financial services , and you see what 's happened to the economy , you think , " well , there is a man who delivers on his promises . "
but we 're in a new world now . we 're in a completely new world .
this is the first time that i can remember , where if you get a letter from the bank manager about a loan , you do n't know if you 're borrowing money from him , or if he 's borrowing money from you .
am i right ?
these extraordinary things , icelandic internet accounts .
did anyone here have an icelandic internet account ?
why would you do that ? why would -- it 's like one step up from replying to one of those emails from nigeria , is n't it ?
asking for your bank details .
and , you know , iceland , it was never going to cut it .
it did n't have that kind of collateral .
what does it have ? it has fish , that 's all .
that 's why the prime minister went on television . he said , " this has left us all with a very big haddock . "
a lot of what i do -- i have to try and make sense of things before i can make nonsense of them .
and making sense of the financial crisis is very , very difficult .
luckily , somebody like george bush was really helpful .
he summed it up , really , at a dinner .
he was speaking at a dinner , he said , " wall street got drunk . "
" and now it 's got a hangover . "
and that 's , you know , that 's something -- and that 's something we can relate to .
it 's certainly something he can relate to .
and the other one , of course , is donald rumsfeld , who said , " there are the known knowns , the things we know we know .
and then you got the known unknowns , the things we know we do n't know .
and then you got the unknown unknowns , those are the things we do n't know we do n't know . "
and being english , when i first heard that i thought , " what a load of cock . "
and then , you 're now , well , actually , that 's what this is about .
this whole , what ben bernanke has said , the chaotic unwinding of the world 's financial system , it 's about -- they do n't know , they did n't know what they were doing .
in 2006 , the head of the american mortgage bankers association said , quote , " as we can clearly see , no seismic occurrence is about to overwhelm the u.s. economy . "
now , there is a man on top of his job .
and when the crisis was happening , the head of quantitative equities at lehman brothers said , " events which models predicted would happen once every 10,000 years happened every day for three days . "
so , it 's extraordinary . it 's a new world that 's very , very difficult to make sense of .
but we have a new hope . we have a new man .
america has now elected its first openly black president .
wonderful news .
not only that , he 's left - handed . have you noticed this ?
how many people here are left - handed ?
you see , a lot of the people that i most admire , they 're great artists , great designers , great thinkers , they 're left - handed .
and somebody said to me last night , you know , being left - handed , you have to learn to write without smudging the ink .
and somebody was talking about metaphors on monday .
and i thought , what a wonderful metaphor , is n't it ? an american president who has to write without smudging the ink .
you like that one ? as opposed to you could see george bush , well , what 's the metaphor there ?
i think it would be something out of the aquatic ape thing , would n't it ?
" well , you know i 'm sorry about that .
i 'm right - handed but i seem to have smudged that ink as well . "
but , you know , he 's gone . now he 's gone .
that 's eight years of american history , eight minutes of my act , just gone like that .
" you know , it 's the end of an error [ sic ] .
i happen to believe it was a great error .
i know folks said to me they believe it was one of the greatest errors in the history of the united states .
but we proved them wrong in iraq .
they said there was no link between iraq and al qaeda .
there is now . "
" but i have a message for the suicide bombers , for those people who 've blown themselves up . "
" we 're going to find you . "
" we 're going to make sure you do n't do it again . "
but now he 's gone , and it 's great to see one of the -- arguably one of the worst speech makers in american history , now given way to one of the greatest , in obama .
you were there , maybe , on the night of his victory .
and he spoke to the crowd in chicago , he said , " if there is anyone out there who still doubts that america is a place where all things are possible . . . "
i ca n't do the whole thing because it would take too long , it really would .
but you get the picture . and then it goes to the inauguration .
and he and the chief justice , they trip over each other , they get their words wrong and they screw the thing up .
and there is george bush sitting there going , " heh heh heh heh . . . "
" not so easy is it ? heh heh heh . "
but the interesting thing is , gordon brown was talking about cicero , who said , people would listen to a speech , they said , " great speech . "
and then they 'd listen to demosthenes , and they 'd say , " let 's march . "
and we all want to believe in president obama .
it 's rather like that line in the film " as good as it gets . "
do you remember that film with helen hunt and jack nicholson , and helen hunt says to jack nicholson , " what do you see in me ? "
and jack nicholson just says , " you make me want to be a better man . "
and you want a leader who inspires and challenges and makes you want to be a better citizen . right ?
but at the moment , it 's a cicero thing .
we like what barack obama says , but we do n't do anything about it .
so he comes over to this country , and he says , " we need a big fiscal stimulus . "
and everyone goes , " great ! " he leaves the country and the french and the germans go , " no , no , forget about that , absolutely not . " nothing happens . he goes to strasburg .
he says , " we need more boots on the ground in afghanistan . "
and everyone goes , " great idea . "
he leaves , people go , " no no no , we 're not going to do that .
5,000 maximum , and no rockets . no , no , not going to do it . "
he goes to prague , he says , " we believe in a nuclear - free world . "
and it 's great to have an american president who can say the word " nuclear , " let 's just point that out first .
do you remember that ? george bush , " a nu - ca - ler . "
sorry , what ? " a nu - ca - ler . "
could you say " avuncular " ? " avunclear . "
thank you very much .
but he says , " we want a nuclear - free world . "
and that day , north korea , that very day , north korea is just seeing if it can just get one over japan -- -- and land it before ...
so , where do we look for inspiration ? we 've still got bill clinton .
" travels the world . "
" i believe , i believe it was president dwight d. eisenhower who said . . . "
" tell a lie ; it was diana ross . . . "
" ... who said , reach out and touch . . . "
" ... somebody 's gla -- hand . "
" make this world a better place , if you can .
i just think that 's important . i really do .
and i was hoping hillary would get to the white house , because she 'd have been out of our home for four years .
and i , you know . "
" so , when that did n't work out i had to make a few arrangements , let me tell you . "
so , there 's him . in britain we have prince charles : " and the environment is so important , all we can do .
my wife gets fed up with me constantly trying to push emissions up her agenda . "
or , any south africans , we have mandela to inspire .
mandela , the great man mandela .
he 's been honored with a statue now .
the previous highest honor he had in britain was a visit from the team from ground force , a gardening program .
" so , nelson , how would you like a nice water feature ? "
" ahh , listen to me mr. titchmarsh . "
" i was held in prison for nearly 30 years on an island in the middle of the ocean .
why would i need a bloody water feature ? "
very quickly : i was n't quite sure how to end this talk and then yesterday that man came up with a wonderful quote from the " japanese essays on idleness " which said it 's nice to have something which is unfinished because it implies there is still room for growth .
thank you very much indeed .
