the " dirty jobs " crew and i were called to a little town in colorado , called craig .
it 's only a couple dozen square miles . it 's in the rockies .
and the job in question was sheep rancher .
my role on the show , for those of you who have n't seen it -- it 's pretty simple .
i 'm an apprentice , and i work with the people who actually do the jobs in question .
and my responsibilities are to simply try and keep up and give an honest account of what it 's like to be these people , for one day in their life .
the job in question : herding sheep . great .
we go to craig and we check in to a hotel and i realize the next day that castration is going to be an absolute part of this work .
so , normally , i never do any research at all .
but , this is a touchy subject , and i work for the discovery channel , and we want to portray accurately whatever it is we do , and we certainly want to do it with a lot of respect for the animals .
so i called the humane society and i say , " look , i 'm going to be castrating some lambs , can you tell me the deal ? "
and they 're like , " yeah , it 's pretty straightforward . "
they use a band -- basically a rubber band , like this , only a little smaller .
this one was actually around the playing cards i got yesterday , but it had a certain familiarity to it .
and i said , " well , what exactly is the process ? "
and they said , " the band is applied to the tail , tightly .
and then another band is applied to the scrotum , tightly .
blood flow is slowly retarded ; a week later the parts in question fall off .
" great -- got it . "
ok , i call the spca to confirm this -- they confirm it .
i also call peta , just for fun , and they do n't like it -- but they confirm it .
ok , that 's basically how you do it .
so the next day i go out .
and i 'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built , and we go about the business of animal husbandry .
melanie is the wife of albert .
albert is the shepherd in question .
melanie picks up the lamb -- two hands -- one hand on both legs on the right , likewise on the left .
lamb goes on the post , she opens it up .
alright . great .
albert goes in , i follow albert , the crew is around .
i always watch the process done the first time before i try it .
being an apprentice , you know , you do that .
albert reaches in his pocket to pull out , you know , this black rubber band but what comes out instead is a knife .
and i 'm like that 's not rubber at all , you know .
and he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the rockies , it was very -- it was , it was impressive .
in the space of about two seconds , albert had the knife between the cartilage of the tail , right next to the butt of the lamb , and very quickly the tail was gone and in the bucket that i was holding .
a second later , with a big thumb and a well calloused forefinger , he had the scrotum firmly in his grasp .
and he pulled it toward him , like so , and he took the knife and he put it on the tip .
now you think you know what 's coming , michael -- you do n't , ok ?
he snips it , throws the tip over his shoulder , and then grabs the scrotum and pushes it upward , and then his head dips down , obscuring my view , but what i hear is a slurping sound , and a noise that sounds like velcro being yanked off a sticky wall and i am not even kidding .
can we roll the video ?
no i 'm kidding -- we do n't -- i thought it best to talk in pictures .
so , i do something now i 've never ever done on a " dirty jobs " shoot , ever .
i say , " time out . stop . "
you guys know the show , we use take one , we do n't do take two .
there 's no writing , there 's no scripting , there 's no nonsense .
we do n't fool around , we do n't rehearse -- we shoot what we get !
i said , " stop . this is nuts . "
i mean , you know .
" this is crazy .
we ca n't do this . "
and albert 's like , " what ? "
and i 'm like , " i do n't know what just happened , but there are testicles in this bucket and that 's not how we do it . "
and he said " well , that 's how we do it . "
and i said , " why would you do it this way ? "
and before i even let him explain , i said , " i want to do it the right way , with the rubber bands . "
and he says , " like the humane society ? "
and i said , " yes , like the humane society .
let 's do something that does n't make the lamb squeal and bleed -- we 're on in five continents , dude .
we 're on twice a day on the discovery channel -- we ca n't do this . "
he says , " ok . "
he goes to his box and he pulls out a bag of these little rubber bands .
melanie picks up another lamb , puts it on the post , band goes on the tail , band goes on the scrotum .
lamb goes on the ground , lamb takes two steps , falls down , gets up , shakes a little , takes another couple steps , falls down .
i 'm like , this is not a good sign for this lamb , at all .
gets up , walks to the corner , it 's quivering , and it lies down and it 's in obvious distress .
and i 'm looking at the lamb and i say , " albert , how long ?
when does he get up ? "
he 's like , " a day . "
i said , " a day ! how long does it take them to fall off ? "
" a week . "
meanwhile , the lamb that he had just did his little procedure on is , you know , he 's just prancing around , bleeding stopped .
he 's , you know , nibbling on some grass , frolicking .
and i was just so blown away at how wrong i was , in that second .
and i was reminded how utterly wrong i am , so much of the time .
and i was especially reminded of what an ridiculously short straw i had that day because now i had to do what albert had just done , and there are like 100 of these lambs in the pen , and suddenly this whole thing 's starting to feel like a german porno , and i 'm like ...
melanie picks up the lamb , puts it on the post , opens it up .
albert hands me the knife .
i go in , tail comes off .
i go in , i grab the scrotum , tip comes off .
albert instructs , " push it way up there . "
i do .
" push it further . "
i do .
the testicles emerge -- they look like thumbs , coming right at you -- and he says , " bite ' em .
just bite ' em off . "
and i heard him , i heard all the words .
like , how did -- how did i get here ?
how did -- you know -- i mean -- how did i get here ?
it 's just -- it 's one of those moments where the brain goes off on it 's own : and suddenly , i 'm standing there , in the rockies , and all i can think of is the aristotelian definition of a tragedy .
you know , aristotle says a tragedy is that moment when the hero comes face to face with his true identity .
and i 'm like , " what is this jacked - up metaphor ?
i do n't like what i 'm thinking right now . "
and i ca n't get this thought out of my head , and i ca n't get that vision out of my sight , so i did what i had to do .
i went in and i took them .
i took them like this , and i yanked my face back .
and i 'm standing there with two testicles on my chin .
and now i ca n't get -- i ca n't shake the metaphor .
ok , i 'm still in " poetics , " in aristotle , and i 'm thinking -- out of nowhere , two terms come crashing into my head that i have n't heard since my classics professor in college drilled them there .
and they are anagnorisis and peripeteia .
anagnorisis and peripeteia .
anagnorisis is the greek word for discovery .
literally , the transition from ignorance to knowledge is anagnorisis .
it 's what our network does ; it 's what " dirty jobs " is .
and i 'm up to my neck in anagnorises every single day .
great .
the other word , peripeteia , that 's the moment in the great tragedies , you know -- euripides and sophocles -- the moment where oedipus has his moment , where he suddenly realizes that hot chick he 's been sleeping with and having babies with is his mother . ok .
that 's peripety or peripeteia .
and this metaphor in my head -- i got anagnorisis and peripetia on my chin .
i got to tell you , it 's such a great device though .
when you start to look for peripetia , you find it everywhere .
i mean , bruce willis in " the sixth sense , " right ?
spends the whole movie trying to help the little kid who sees dead people , and then , boom -- " oh , i 'm dead " -- peripetia .
you know ?
it 's crushing when the audience sees it the right way .
neo in " the matrix , " you know ?
" oh , i 'm living in a computer program " -- that 's weird .
these discoveries that lead to sudden realizations ; and i 've been having them , over 200 dirty jobs , i have them all the time , but that one -- that one drilled something home in a way that i just was n't prepared for .
and , as i stood there , looking at the happy lamb that i had just defiled -- but it looked ok .
looking at that poor other little thing that i 'd done it the right way on , and i just was struck by if i 'm wrong about that and if i 'm wrong so often , in a literal way , what other peripatetic misconceptions might i be able to comment upon ?
because , look , i 'm not a social anthropologist but i have a friend who is .
and i talk to him .
and he says , " hey mike .
look , i do n't know if your brain is interested in this sort of thing or not , but do you realize you 've shot in every state ?
you 've worked in mining , you 've worked in fishing , you 've worked in steel , you 've worked in every major industry .
you 've had your back shoulder to shoulder with these guys that our politicians are desperate to relate to every four years , right ? "
i can still see hillary doing the shots of rye , dribbling down her chin , with the steel workers .
i mean , these are the people that i work with every single day .
" and if you have something to say about their thoughts , collectively , it might be time to think about it .
because , dude , you know , four years . "
you know , that 's in my head , testicles are on my chin , thoughts are bouncing around .
and , after that shoot , dirty jobs really did n't change , in terms of what the show is , but it changed for me , personally .
and now , when i talk about the show , i no longer just tell the story you heard and 190 like it .
i do , but i also start to talk about some of the other things i got wrong , some of the other notions of work that i 've just been assuming are sacrosanct , and they 're not .
people with dirty jobs are happier than you think .
as a group , they 're the happiest people i know .
and i do n't want to start whistling " look for the union label , " and all that happy worker crap .
i 'm just telling you that these are balanced people who do unthinkable work .
roadkill picker - uppers whistle while they work . i swear to god -- i did it with them .
they 've got this amazing sort of symmetry to their life .
and i see it over and over and over again .
so i started to wonder what would happen if we challenged some of these sacred cows .
follow your passion -- we 've been talking about it here for the last 36 hours .
follow your passion -- what could possibly be wrong with that ?
probably the worst advice i ever got .
you know , follow your dreams and go broke , right ?
i mean , that 's all i heard growing up .
i did n't know what to do with my life , but i was told if you follow your passion , it 's going to work out .
i can give you 30 examples , right now -- bob combs , the pig farmer in las vegas who collects the uneaten scraps of food from the casinos and feeds them them to his swine .
why ? because there 's so much protein in the stuff we do n't eat his pigs grow at twice the normal speed , and he is one rich pig farmer , and he is good for the environment , and he spends his days doing this incredible service , and he smells like hell , but god bless him .
he 's making a great living .
you ask him , " did you follow your passion here ? "
and he 'd laugh at you .
the guy 's worth -- he just got offered like 60 million dollars for his farm and turned it down , outside of vegas .
he did n't follow his passion .
he stepped back and he watched where everybody was going and he went the other way .
and i hear that story over and over .
matt froind , a dairy farmer in new canaan , connecticut , who woke up one day and realized the crap from his cows was worth more than their milk , if he could use it to make these biodegradable flower pots .
now , he 's selling them to walmart .
follow his passion ? the guy 's -- come on .
so i started to look at passion , i started to look at efficiency versus effectiveness -- as tim talked about earlier , that 's a huge distinction .
i started to look at teamwork and determination , and basically all those platitudes they call " successories " that hang with that schmaltzy art in boardrooms around the world right now .
that stuff -- it 's suddenly all been turned on its head .
safety -- safety first ?
going back to , you know , osha and peta and the humane society : what if osha got it wrong ?
i mean -- this is heresy , what i 'm about to say -- but what if it 's really safety third ?
right ?
no , i mean really .
what i mean to say is i value my safety on these crazy jobs as much as the people that i 'm working with , but the ones who really get it done , they 're not out there talking about safety first .
they know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first , the business of getting it done .
and i 'll never forget , up in the bering sea , i was on a crab boat with the " deadliest catch " guys -- which i also work on -- in the first season .
we 're about 100 miles off the coast of russia : 50 - foot seas , big waves , green water coming over the wheelhouse , right ?
most hazardous environment i 'd ever seen , and i was back with a guy , lashing the pots down .
so , i 'm 40 feet off the deck , which is like looking down at the top of your shoe , you know , and it 's doing this in the ocean .
unspeakably dangerous .
i scamper down , i go into the wheelhouse and i say , with some level of incredulity , " captain , osha . "
and he says , " osha ? ocean . "
and he points out there .
but in that moment , what he said next ca n't be repeated in the lower 48 .
it ca n't be repeated on any factory floor or any construction site .
but he looked at me , and he said , " son " -- he 's my age , by the way , he calls me son , i love that -- he says , " son , i 'm a captain of a crab boat .
my responsibility is not to get you home alive .
my responsibility is to get you home rich . "
you want to get home alive , that 's on you .
and for the rest of that day , safety first .
i was like -- so , the idea that we create this false -- this sense of complacency when all we do is talk about somebody else 's responsibility as though it 's our own , and vice versa .
anyhow , a whole lot of things .
i could talk at length about the many little distinctions we made and the endless list of ways that i got it wrong .
but , what it all comes down to is this .
i formed a theory , and i 'm going to share it now in my remaining two minutes and 30 seconds .
it goes like this -- we 've declared war on work , as a society , all of us .
it 's a civil war .
it 's a cold war , really .
we did n't set out to do it and we did n't twist our mustache in some machiavellian way , but we 've done it .
and we 've waged this war on at least four fronts , certainly in hollywood .
the way we portray working people on tv -- it 's laughable .
if there 's a plumber , he 's 300 pounds and he 's got a giant butt crack . admit it .
you see him all the time .
that 's what plumbers look like , right ?
we turn them into heroes , or we turn them into punch lines .
that 's what tv does .
we try hard on " dirty jobs " not to do that , which is why i do the work and i do n't cheat .
but , we 've waged this war on madison avenue .
i mean , so many of the commercials that come out there -- in the way of a message , what 's really being said ?
your life would be better if you could work a little less , if you did n't have to work so hard , if you could get home a little earlier , if you could retire a little faster , if you could punch out a little sooner -- it 's all in there , over and over , again and again .
washington ? i ca n't even begin to talk about the deals and policies in place that affect the bottom line reality of the available jobs because i do n't really know .
i just know that that 's a front in this war .
and right here guys , silicon valley , i mean -- how many people have an iphone on them right now ?
how many people have their blackberries ?
we 're plugged in ; we 're connected .
i would never suggest for a second that something bad has come out of the tech revolution .
good grief , not to this crowd .
but i would suggest that innovation without imitation is a complete waste of time .
and nobody celebrates imitation the way " dirty jobs " guys know it has to be done .
your iphone without those people making the same interface , the same circuitry , the same board , over and over ?
all of that ? that 's what makes it equally as possible as the genius that goes inside of it .
so , we 've got this new toolbox , you know .
our tools today do n't look like shovels and picks .
they look like the stuff we walk around with .
and so the collective effect of all of that has been this marginalization of lots and lots of jobs .
and i realized , probably too late in this game -- i hope not , because i do n't know if i can do 200 more of these things -- but we 're going to do as many as we can .
and to me the most important thing to know and to really come face to face with , is that fact that i got it wrong about a lot of things , not just the testicles on my chin .
i got a lot wrong .
so , we 're thinking -- by we , i mean me -- that the thing to do is to talk about a pr campaign for work , manual labor , skilled labor .
somebody needs to be out there talking about the forgotten benefits .
i 'm talking about grandfather stuff , the stuff a lot us probably grew up with but we 've kind of -- you know , kind of lost a little .
barack wants to create two and a half million jobs .
the infrastructure is a huge deal .
this war on work , that i suppose exists , has casualties like any other war .
the infrastructure 's the first one ; declining trade - school enrollments are the second one .
every single year : fewer electricians , fewer carpenters , fewer plumbers , fewer welders , fewer pipefitters , fewer steamfitters .
the infrastructure jobs that everybody is talking about creating are those guys -- the ones that have been in decline , over and over .
meanwhile , we 've got two trillion dollars -- at a minimum , according to the american society of civil engineers -- that we need to expend to even make a dent in the infrastructure , which is currently rated at a d minus .
so , if i were running for anything , and i 'm not , i would simply say that the jobs we hope to make and the jobs we hope to create are n't going to stick unless they 're jobs that people want .
and i know the point of this conference is to celebrate things that are near and dear to us , but i also know that clean and dirty are n't opposites .
they 're two sides of the same coin , just like innovation and imitation , like risk and responsibility , like peripetia and anagnorisis , like that poor little lamb , who i hope is n't quivering anymore , and like my time that 's gone .
it 's been great talking to you and get back to work , will you ?
