hello , everyone . because this is my first time at ted , i 've decided to bring along an old friend to help break the ice a bit .
yes . that 's right . this is barbie .
she 's 50 years old . and she 's looking as young as ever .
but i 'd also like to introduce you to what may be an unfamiliar face .
this is fulla . fulla is the arab world 's answer to barbie .
now , according to proponents of the clash of civilizations , barbie and fulla occupy these completely separate spheres .
they have different interests . they have divergent values .
and should they ever come in contact ...
well , i 've got to tell you , it 's just not going to be pretty .
my experience , however , in the islamic world is very different .
where i work , in the arab region , people are busy taking up western innovations and changing them into things which are neither conventionally western , nor are they traditionally islamic .
i want to show you two examples .
the first is 4shbab .
it means " for youth " and it 's a new arab tv channel .
: video clips from across the globe .
the usa .
♫ i am not afraid to stand alone ♫ ♫ i am not afraid to stand alone , if allah is by my side ♫ ♫ i am not afraid to stand alone ♫ ♫ everything will be all right ♫ ♫ i am not afraid to stand alone ♫ the arab world .
♫ she was preserved by modesty of the religion ♫ ♫ she was adorned by the light of the quran ♫ shereen el feki : 4shbab has been dubbed islamic mtv .
its creator , who is an egyptian tv producer called ahmed abu haïba , wants young people to be inspired by islam to lead better lives .
he reckons the best way to get that message across is to use the enormously popular medium of music videos .
4shbab was set up as an alternative to existing arab music channels .
and they look something like this .
that , by the way is haifa wehbe . she 's a lebanese pop star and pan - arab pin - up girl .
in the world of 4shbab , it 's not about bump and grind .
but it 's not about fire and brimstone either .
its videos are intended to show a kinder , gentler face of islam , for young people to deal with life 's challenges .
now , my second example is for a slightly younger crowd .
and it 's called " the 99. "
now , these are the world 's first islamic superheroes .
they were created by a kuwaiti psychologist called naif al mutawa .
and his desire is to rescue islam from images of intolerance , all in a child - friendly format .
" the 99. " the characters are meant to embody the 99 attributes of allah : justice , wisdom , mercy , among others .
so , for example , there is the character of noora .
she is meant to have the power to look inside people and see the good and bad in everyone .
another character called jami has the ability to create fantastic inventions .
now , " the 99 " is not just a comic book .
it 's now a theme park .
there is an animated series in the works .
and by this time next year , the likes of superman and wonder woman will have joined forces with " the 99 " to beat injustice wherever they find it .
" the 99 " and 4shbab are just two of many examples of this sort of islamic cross - cultural hybridization .
we 're not talking here about a clash of civilizations .
nor is it some sort of indistinguishable mash .
i like to think of it as a mesh of civilizations , in which the strands of different cultures are intertwined .
now , while 4shbab and " the 99 " may look new and shiny , there is actually a very long tradition of this .
throughout its history , islam has borrowed and adapted from other civilizations both ancient and modern .
after all , it 's the quran which encourages us to do this : " we made you into nations and tribes so that you could learn from one another . "
and to my mind , those are pretty wise words , no matter what your creed . thank you .
