hi . for those of you who have n't seen dancing bears , these are the dancing bears .
in 1995 , we started working on a two - year investigative research project to try and find out what was going on .
because the sloth bears in the wild were obviously getting depleted because of this .
this is the qalandar community . they are a marginalized islamic community who live across india , and have been in india since the 13th century .
we went about getting evidence of what was going on .
and this is footage from a hidden camera in a button .
and we went in , pretending to be buyers .
and we found this right in this very state , in karnataka .
and the bear cubs were being harvested from across the country and being sold and traded .
these were being sold for about 2,000 dollars each , and they are used for bear paw soup , and also being trained , later on , to become dancing bears like the one you just saw .
sadly , the family of qalandars depended on this bear .
the couple are barely 18 years old .
they already have four children beside them . you can see them .
and the economy of the family and their livelihood depended on those animals .
so , we had to deal with it in a very practical and sustainable manner .
now , when we started working deeper and digging deeper , we found that it 's an illegal act .
these guys could go to jail for up to seven years if they were caught by authorities .
and what they were doing to the bears was really appalling .
it was unacceptable .
the mother bears are usually killed .
the cubs , which are taken , are separated .
their teeth are basically bashed out with a metal rod .
and they use a red hot iron needle to make a hole through the muzzle .
now we had to start changing these people and converting them from using that for a livelihood , to getting something else .
so , this is bitu qalandar , who was our first experiment .
and we were so unsure that this would work .
we were n't sure at all . and we managed to convince him .
and we said , " okay , here is some seed fund .
let 's see if you can get something else . " and we got the bear surrendered to -- we set up a sanctuary . we have four sanctuaries in india .
and now he sells cool drinks , he 's by the highway .
he has a telephone booth .
and then it started , there was no turning back after that .
this is sadua who came and surrendered his bear .
and now he runs a cattle fodder store and a grain store near agra .
then there was no looking back at all for us .
we gave cycle rickshaws .
we set up carpet - weaving units , vocational training for the women .
the women were just not allowed to come out of the community and work with mainstream society . so , we were able to address that .
education . the kids never went to school .
they only had islamic education , very little of it .
and they were never allowed to go to school because they were an extra earning hand at home . so we managed to get education .
so , we sponsor 600 children education programs today .
we were able to ensure brighter futures for these people .
of course we also had to get the bears in .
this is what happens to the bears when they come in .
and this is what we turn them into .
we have a veterinary facility in our rescue centers .
so , basically in 2002 there were 1,200 dancing bears .
we rescued over 550 dancing bears .
we 've been able to ensure better futures for the people and the bears .
the big news that i want to announce today is that next month we will be bringing in the very last bear of india , into our rescue center .
and india will no longer have to witness this cruel barbaric practice which has been here for centuries .
and the people can hold their heads up high .
and the qalandar people will rise above all this cruel barbaric past that they 've lived all their lives .
and the beautiful bears can of course live in the wild again .
and there will be no more removing of these bears .
and the children , both humans and bear cubs can live peacefully . thank you .
