thank you for being here .
and i say " thank you for being here " because i was silent for 17 years .
and the first words that i spoke were in washington , d.c. , on the 20th anniversary of earth day .
and my family and friends had gathered there to hear me speak .
and i said , " thank you for being here . "
my mother , out in the audience , she jumped up , " hallelujah , johnny 's talking ! "
imagine if you were quiet for 17 years and your mother was out in the audience , say .
my dad said to me , " that 's one " -- i 'll explain that .
but i turned around because i did n't recognize where my voice was coming from .
i had n't heard my voice in 17 years , so i turned around and i looked and i said , " god , who 's saying what i 'm thinking ? "
and then i realized it was me , you know , and i kind of laughed .
and i could see my father : " yeah , he really is crazy . "
well , i want to take you on this journey .
and the journey , i believe , is a metaphor for all of our journeys .
even though this one is kind of unusual , i want you to think about your own journey .
my journey began in 1971 when i witnessed two oil tankers collide beneath the golden gate , and a half a million gallons of oil spilled into the bay .
it disturbed me so much that i decided that i was going to give up riding and driving in motorized vehicles .
that 's a big thing in california .
and it was a big thing in my little community of point reyes station in inverness , california , because there were only about 350 people there in the winter -- this was back in '71 now .
and so when i came in and i started walking around , people -- they just knew what was going on .
and people would drive up next to me and say , " john , what are you doing ? "
and i 'd say , " well , i 'm walking for the environment . "
and they said , " no , you 're walking to make us look bad , right ?
you 're walking to make us feel bad . "
and maybe there was some truth to that , because i thought that if i started walking , everyone would follow .
because of the oil , everybody talked about the polllution .
and so i argued with people about that , i argued and i argued .
i called my parents up .
i said , " i 've given up riding and driving in cars . "
my dad said , " why did n't you do that when you were 16 ? "
i did n't know about the environment then .
they 're back in philadelphia .
and so i told my mother , " i 'm happy though , i 'm really happy . "
she said , " if you were happy , son , you would n't have to say it . "
mothers are like that .
and so , on my 27th birthday i decided , because i argued so much and i talk so much , that i was going to stop speaking for just one day -- one day -- to give it a rest .
and so i did .
i got up in the morning and i did n't say a word .
and i have to tell you , it was a very moving experience , because for the first time , i began listening -- in a long time .
and what i heard , it kind of disturbed me .
because what i used to do , when i thought i was listening , was i would listen just enough to hear what people had to say and think that i could -- i knew what they were going to say , and so i stopped listening .
and in my mind , i just kind of raced ahead and thought of what i was going to say back , while they were still finishing up .
and then i would launch in .
well , that just ended communication .
so on this first day i actually listened .
and it was very sad for me , because i realized that for those many years i had not been learning .
i was 27. i thought i knew everything .
i did n't .
and so i decided i 'd better do this for another day , and another day , and another day until finally , i promised myself for a year i would keep quiet because i started learning more and more and i needed to learn more .
so for a year i said i would keep quiet , and then on my birthday i would reassess what i had learned and maybe i would talk again .
well , that lasted 17 years .
now during that time -- those 17 years -- i walked and i played the banjo and i painted and i wrote in my journal , and i tried to study the environment by reading books .
and i decided that i was going to go to school . so i did .
i walked up to ashland , oregon , where they were offering an environmental studies degree .
it 's only 500 miles .
and i went into the registrar 's office and --
" what , what , what ? "
i had a newspaper clipping .
" oh , so you really want to go to school here ?
you do n't . . . ?
we have a special program for you . " they did .
and in those two years , i graduated with my first degree -- a bachelor 's degree .
and my father came out , he was so proud .
he said , " listen , we 're really proud of you son , but what are you going to do with a bachelor 's degree ?
you do n't ride in cars , you do n't talk -- you 're going to have to do those things . "
i hunched my shoulder , i picked my backpack up again and i started walking .
i walked all the way up to port townsend , washington , where i built a wooden boat , rode it across puget sound
and walked across washington [ to ] idaho and down to missoula , montana .
i had written the university of montana two years earlier and said i 'd like to go to school there .
i said i 'd be there in about two years .
and i was there . i showed up in two years and they -- i tell this story because they really helped me .
there are two stories in montana .
the first story is i did n't have any money -- that 's a sign i used a lot .
and they said , " do n't worry about that . "
the director of the program said , " come back tomorrow . "
he gave me 150 dollars , and he said , " register for one credit .
you 're going to go to south america , are n't you ? "
and i said -- rivers and lakes , the hydrological systems , south america .
so i did that .
he came back ; he said to me , " ok john , now that you 've registered for that one credit , you can have a key to an office , you can matriculate -- you 're matriculating , so you can use the library .
and what we 're going to do is , we 're going to have all of the professors allow you to go to class . they 're going to save your grade , and when we figure out how to get you the rest of the money , then you can register for that class and they 'll give you the grade . "
wow , they do n't do that in graduate schools , i do n't think .
but i use that story because they really wanted to help me .
they saw that i was really interested in the environment , and they really wanted to help me along the way .
and during that time , i actually taught classes without speaking .
i had 13 students when i first walked into the class . i explained , with a friend who could interpret my sign language , that i was john francis , i was walking around the world , i did n't talk and this was the last time this person 's going to be here interpreting for me .
all the students sat around and they went ...
i could see they were looking for the schedule , to see when they could get out .
they had to take that class with me .
two weeks later , everyone was trying to get into our class .
and i learned in that class -- because i would do things like this ...
and they were all gathered around , going , " what 's he trying to say ? "
" i do n't know , i think he 's talking about clear cutting . " " yeah , clear cutting . "
" no , no , no , that 's not clear cutting , that 's -- he 's using a handsaw . "
" well , you ca n't clearcut with a . . . "
" yes , you can clear cut . . . "
" no , i think he 's talking about selective forestry . "
now this was a discussion class and we were having a discussion .
i just backed out of that , you know , and i just kind of kept the fists from flying .
but what i learned was that sometimes i would make a sign and they said things that i absolutely did not mean , but i should have .
and so what came to me is , if you were a teacher and you were teaching , if you were n't learning you probably were n't teaching very well .
and so i went on .
my dad came out to see me graduate and , you know , i did the deal , and my father said , " we 're really proud of you son , but ... "
you know what went on , he said , " you 've got to start riding and driving and start talking .
what are you going to do with a master 's degree ? "
i hunched my shoulder , i got my backpack and i went on to the university of wisconsin .
i spent two years there writing on oil spills .
no one was interested in oil spills .
but something happened -- exxon valdez .
and i was the only one in the united states writing on oil spills .
my dad came out again .
he said , " i do n't know how you do this , son -- i mean , you do n't ride in cars , you do n't talk .
my sister said maybe i should leave you alone , because you seem to be doing a lot better when you 're not saying anything . "
well , i put on my backpack again .
i put my banjo on and i walked all the way to the east coast , put my foot in the atlantic ocean -- it was seven years and one day it took me to walk across the united states .
and on earth day , 1990 -- the 20th anniversary of earth day -- that 's when i began to speak .
and that 's why i said , " thank you for being here . "
because it 's sort of like that tree in the forest falling ; and if there 's no one there to hear , does it really make a sound ?
and i 'm thanking you , and i 'm thanking my family because they had come to hear me speak .
and that 's communication .
and they also taught me about listening -- that they listened to me .
and it 's one of those things that came out of the silence , the listening to each other .
really , very important -- we need to listen to each other .
well , my journey kept going on .
my dad said , " that 's one , " and i still did n't let that go .
i worked for the coastguard , was made a u.n. goodwill ambassador .
i wrote regulations for the united states -- i mean , i wrote oil spill regulations .
20 years ago , if someone had said to me , " john , do you really want to make a difference ? "
" yeah , i want to make a difference . "
he said , " you just start walking east ; get out of your car and just start walking east . "
and as i walked off a little bit , they 'd say , " yeah , and shut up , too . "
" you 're going to make a difference , buddy . "
how could that be , how could that be ?
how could doing such a simple thing like walking and not talking make a difference ?
well , my time at the coast guard was a really good time .
and after that -- i only worked one year -- i said , " that 's enough . one year 's enough for me to do that . "
i got on a sailboat and i sailed down to the caribbean , and walked through all of the islands , and to venezuela .
and you know , i forgot the most important thing , which is why i started talking , which i have to tell you .
i started talking because i had studied environment . i 'd studied environment at this formal level , but there was this informal level .
and the informal level -- i learned about people , and what we do and how we are .
and environment changed from just being about trees and birds and endangered species to being about how we treated each other .
because if we are the environment , then all we need to do is look around us and see how we treat ourselves and how we treat each other .
and so that 's the message that i had .
and i said , " well , i 'm going to have to spread that message . "
and i got in my sailboat , sailed all the way through the caribbean -- it was n't really my sailboat , i kind of worked on that boat -- got to venezuela and i started walking .
this is the last part of this story , because it 's how i got here , because i still did n't ride in motorized vehicles .
i was walking through el dorado -- it 's a prison town , famous prison , or infamous prison -- in venezuela , and i do n't know what possessed me , because this was not like me .
there i am , walking past the guard gate and the guard stops and says , " pasaporte , pasaporte , " and with an m 16 pointed at me .
and i looked at him and i said , " passport , huh ? i do n't need to show you my passport . it 's in the back of my pack .
i 'm dr. francis ; i 'm a u.n. ambassador and i 'm walking around the world . "
and i started walking off .
what possessed me to say this thing ?
the road turned into the jungle .
i did n't get shot .
and i got to -- i start saying , " free at last -- thank god almighty , i 'm free at last . "
" what was that about , " i 'm saying . what was that about ?
it took me 100 miles to figure out that , in my heart , in me , i had become a prisoner .
i was a prisoner and i needed to escape .
the prison that i was in was the fact that i did not drive or use motorized vehicles .
now how could that be ?
because when i started , it seemed very appropriate to me not to use motorized vehicles .
but the thing that was different was that every birthday , i asked myself about silence , but i never asked myself about my decision to just use my feet .
i had no idea i was going to become a u.n. ambassador .
i had no idea i would have a ph.d.
and so i realized that i had a responsibility to more than just me , and that i was going to have to change .
you know , we can do it .
i was going to have to change .
and i was afraid to change , because i was so used to the guy who only just walked .
i was so used to that person that i did n't want to stop .
i did n't know who i would be if i changed .
but i know i needed to .
i know i needed to change , because it would be the only way that i could be here today .
and i know that a lot of times we find ourselves in this wonderful place where we 've gotten to , but there 's another place for us to go .
and we kind of have to leave behind the security of who we 've become , and go to the place of who we are becoming .
and so , i want to encourage you to go to that next place , to let yourself out of any prison that you might find yourself in , as comfortable as it may be , because we have to do something now .
we have to change now .
as our former vice president said , we have to become activists .
so if my voice can touch you , if my actions can touch you , if my being here can touch you , please let it be .
and i know that all of you have touched me while i 've been here .
so , let 's go out into the world and take this caring , this love , this respect that we 've shown each other right here at ted , and take this out into the world .
because we are the environment , and how we treat each other is really how we 're going to treat the environment .
so i want to thank you for being here and i want to end this in five seconds of silence .
thank you .
