aids was discovered 1981 ; the virus , 1983 .
these gapminder bubbles show you how the spread of the virus was in 1983 in the world , or how we estimate that it was .
what we are showing here is -- on this axis here , i 'm showing percent of infected adults .
and on this axis , i 'm showing dollars per person in income .
and the size of these bubbles , the size of the bubbles here , that shows how many are infected in each country , and the color is the continent .
now , you can see united states , in 1983 , had a very low percentage infected , but due to the big population , still a sizable bubble .
there were quite many people infected in the united states .
and , up there , you see uganda .
they had almost five percent infected , and quite a big bubble in spite of being a small country , then .
and they were probably the most infected country in the world .
now , what has happened ?
now you have understood the graph and now , in the next 60 seconds , we will play the hiv epidemic in the world .
but first , i have a new invention here .
i have solidified the beam of the laser pointer .
so , ready , steady , go !
first , we have the fast rise in uganda and zimbabwe .
they went upwards like this .
in asia , the first country to be heavily infected was thailand --
they reached one to two percent .
then , uganda started to turn back , whereas zimbabwe skyrocketed , and some years later south africa had a terrible rise of hiv frequency .
look , india got many infected , but had a low level .
and almost the same happens here .
see , uganda coming down , zimbabwe coming down , russia went to one percent .
in the last two to three years , we have reached a steady state of hiv epidemic in the world .
25 years it took .
but , steady state does n't mean that things are getting better , it 's just that they have stopped getting worse .
and it has -- the steady state is , more or less , one percent of the adult world population is hiv - infected .
it means 30 to 40 million people , the whole of california -- every person , that 's more or less what we have today in the world .
now , let me make a fast replay of botswana .
botswana -- upper middle - income country in southern africa , democratic government , good economy , and this is what happened there .
they started low , they skyrocketed , they peaked up there in 2003 , and now they are down .
but they are falling only slowly , because in botswana , with good economy and governance , they can manage to treat people .
and if people who are infected are treated , they do n't die of aids .
these percentages wo n't come down because people can survive 10 to 20 years .
so there 's some problem with these metrics now .
but the poorer countries in africa , the low - income countries down here , there the rates fall faster , of the percentage infected , because people still die .
in spite of pepfar , the generous pepfar , all people are not reached by treatment , and of those who are reached by treatment in the poor countries , only 60 percent are left on treatment after two years .
it 's not realistic with lifelong treatment for everyone in the poorest countries .
but it 's very good that what is done is being done .
but focus now is back on prevention .
it is only by stopping the transmission that the world will be able to deal with it . drugs is too costly -- had we had the vaccine , or when we will get the vaccine , that 's something more effective -- but the drugs are very costly for the poor .
not the drug in itself , but the treatment and the care which is needed around it .
so , when we look at the pattern , one thing comes out very clearly : you see the blue bubbles and people say hiv is very high in africa .
i would say , hiv is very different in africa .
you 'll find the highest hiv rate in the world in african countries , and yet you 'll find senegal , down here -- the same rate as united states .
and you 'll find madagascar , and you 'll find a lot of african countries about as low as the rest of the world .
it 's this terrible simplification that there 's one africa and things go on in one way in africa .
we have to stop that .
it 's not respectful , and it 's not very clever to think that way .
i had the fortune to live and work for a time in the united states .
i found out that salt lake city and san francisco were different .
and so it is in africa -- it 's a lot of difference .
so , why is it so high ? is it war ?
no , it 's not . look here .
war - torn congo is down there -- two , three , four percent .
and this is peaceful zambia , neighboring country -- 15 percent .
and there 's good studies of the refugees coming out of congo -- they have two , three percent infected , and peaceful zambia -- much higher .
there are now studies clearly showing that the wars are terrible , that rapes are terrible ,
but this is not the driving force for the high levels in africa .
so , is it poverty ?
well if you look at the macro level , it seems more money , more hiv .
but that 's very simplistic , so let 's go down and look at tanzania .
i will split tanzania in five income groups , from the highest income to the lowest income , and here we go .
the ones with the highest income , the better off -- i would n't say rich -- they have higher hiv .
the difference goes from 11 percent down to four percent , and it is even bigger among women .
there 's a lot of things that we thought , that now , good research , done by african institutions and researchers together with the international researchers , show that that 's not the case .
so , this is the difference within tanzania .
and , i ca n't avoid showing kenya .
look here at kenya .
i 've split kenya in its provinces .
here it goes .
see the difference within one african country -- it goes from very low level to very high level , and most of the provinces in kenya is quite modest .
so , what is it then ?
why do we see this extremely high levels in some countries ?
well , it is more common with multiple partners , there is less condom use , and there is age - disparate sex -- that is , older men tend to have sex with younger women .
we see higher rates in younger women than younger men in many of these highly affected countries .
but where are they situated ?
i will swap the bubbles to a map .
look , the highly infected are four percent of all population and they hold 50 percent of the hiv - infected .
hiv exists all over the world .
look , you have bubbles all over the world here .
brazil has many hiv - infected .
arab countries not so much , but iran is quite high .
they have heroin addiction and also prostitution in iran .
india has many because they are many .
southeast asia , and so on .
but , there is one part of africa -- and the difficult thing is , at the same time , not to make a uniform statement about africa , not to come to simple ideas of why it is like this , on one hand . on the other hand , try to say that this is not the case , because there is a scientific consensus about this pattern now .
unaids have done good data available , finally , about the spread of hiv .
it could be concurrency .
it could be some virus types .
it could be that there is other things which makes transmission occur in a higher frequency .
after all , if you are completely healthy and you have heterosexual sex , the risk of infection in one intercourse is one in 1,000 .
do n't jump to conclusions now on how to behave tonight and so on .
but -- and if you are in an unfavorable situation , more sexually transmitted diseases , it can be one in 100 .
but what we think is that it could be concurrency .
and what is concurrency ?
in sweden , we have no concurrency .
we have serial monogamy .
vodka , new year 's eve -- new partner for the spring .
vodka , midsummer 's eve -- new partner for the fall .
vodka -- and it goes on like this , you know ?
and you collect a big number of exes .
and we have a terrible chlamydia epidemic -- terrible chlamydia epidemic which sticks around for many years .
hiv has a peak three to six weeks after infection and therefore , having more than one partner in the same month is much more dangerous for hiv than others .
probably , it 's a combination of this .
and what makes me so happy is that we are moving now towards fact when we look at this .
you can get this chart , free .
we have uploaded unaids data on the gapminder site .
and we hope that when we act on global problems in the future we will not only have the heart , we will not only have the money , but we will also use the brain .
thank you very much .
