about a year and a half ago , stephen lawler , who also gave a talk here at ted in 2007 on virtual earth , brought me over to become the architect of bing maps , which is microsoft 's online - mapping effort .
in the past two and a half , we 've been very hard at work on redefining the way maps work online .
and we really are seeing this in very different terms from the kind of mapping and direction site that one is used to .
so , the first thing that you might notice about the mapping site is just the fluidity of the zooming and the panning , which , if you 're familiar at all with seadragon , that 's where it comes from .
mapping is , of course , not just about cartography , it 's also about imagery .
so , as we zoom - in beyond a certain level this resolves into a kind of sim city - like virtual view at 45 degrees .
this can be viewed from any of the cardinal directions to show you the 3d structure of the city , all the facades .
now , we see this space , this three - dimensional environment , as being a canvas on which all sorts of applications can play out ,
and map 's directions are really just one of them .
if you click on this , you 'll see some of the ones that we 've put out , just in the past couple of months since we 've launched .
so , for example , a couple of days after the disaster in haiti , we had an earthquake map that showed before and after pictures from the sky .
this wonderful one which i do n't have time to show you is taking hyper - local blogs in real time and mapping those stories , those entries to the places that are referred to on the blogs .
it 's wonderful .
but i 'm going to show you some more candy sort of stuff .
so , we see the imagery , of course , not stopping at the sky .
these little green bubbles represent photosynths that users have made .
i 'm not going to dive into them either , but photosynths are integrated into the map .
everything that 's cased in blue is an area where we 've taken imagery on the ground as well .
and so , when you fly down -- thank you . when you fly down to the ground , and you see this kind of panoramic imagery , the first thing that you might notice is that it 's not just a picture , there 's just as much three - dimensional understanding of this environment as there is of the three - dimensional city from above , so if i click on something to get a closer view of it , then , the fact that that transition looks as it does , is a function of all of that geometry , all of that 3d understanding behind this model .
now , i 'll show you a fun app that -- we 've been working on a collaboration with our friends at flickr .
this takes flickr , georegistered imagery and uses photosynth - like processes to connect that imagery to our imagery , so -- i 'm not sure if that 's the one i actually meant to pull up , but -- but notice -- this is , of course , a popular tourist site , and there are lots of photos around here , and these photos are all taken at different times .
so this one was taken around five .
so that 's the flickr photo , that 's our imagery .
so you really see how this kind of crowd - sourced imagery is integrating , in a very deep way , into the map itself .
thank you .
there are several reasons why this is interesting and one of them , of course , is time travel .
and i 'm not going to show you some of the wonderful historic imagery in here , but there are some with horses and carriages and so on as well .
but what 's cool about this is that , not only is it augmenting this visual representation of the world with things that are coming in from users , but it also is the foundation for augmented reality , and that 's something that i 'll be showing you more of in just a moment .
now i just made a transition indoors . that 's also interesting .
ok , notice there 's now a roof above us .
we 're inside the pike place market .
and this is something that we 're able to do with a backpack camera ,
so , we 're now not only imaging in the street with this camera on tops of cars , but we 're also imaging inside .
and from here , we 're able to do the same sorts of registration , not only of still images , but also of video .
so this is something that we 're now going to try for the first time , live , and this is really , truly , very frightening .
ok .
all right , guys , are you there ?
all right . i 'm hitting it . i 'm punching play .
i 'm live . all right . there we go .
so , these are our friends in pike place market , the lab.
so they 're broadcasting this live .
ok , george , can you pan back over to the corner market ?
because i want to show points of interest .
no , no. the other way .
yeah , yeah , back to the corner , back to the corner .
i do n't want to see you guys yet .
ok , ok , back to the corner , back to the corner , back to the corner .
ok , never mind .
what i wanted to show you was these points of interest over here on top of the image because what that gives you a sense of is the way , if you 're actually on the spot ,
you can think about this -- this is taking a step in addition to augmented reality .
what the hell are you guys -- oh , sorry .
we 're doing two different --
ok , i 'm hanging up now .
we 're doing two different things here .
one of them is to take that real ...
all right , let me just take a moment and thank the team .
they 've done a fantastic job of pulling this together .
i 'm going to abandon them now and walk back outside .
and while i walk outside , i 'll just mention that here we 're using this for telepresence , but you can equally well use this on the spot , for augmented reality .
when you use it on the spot , it means that you 're able to bring all of that metadata and information about the world to you .
so here , we 're taking the extra step of also broadcasting it .
that was being broadcast , by the way , on a 4g network from the market .
all right , and now there 's one last ted talk that microsoft has given in the past several years .
and that 's curtis wong , worldwide telescope .
so , we 're going to head over to the dumpsters , where it 's traditional , after a long day at the market , to go out for a break , but also stare up at the sky .
this is the integration of worldwide telescope into our maps .
this is the current -- thank you -- this is the current time . if we scrub the time , then we can see how the sky will look at different times , and we can get all of this very detailed information about different times , different dates :
let 's move the moon a little higher in the sky , maybe change the date .
i would like to kind of zoom in on the moon .
so , this is an astronomically complete representation of the sky integrated right into the earth .
all right now , i 've overrun my time , so i 've got to stop .
thank you all very much .
