now , since this is tedglobal , who can tell me what this is called in french ?
i see you 're all up on the history of hurdy - gurdy -- " vielle à roue . " and in spanish , " zanfona . "
and in italian , " ghironda , " okay ? hurdy - gurdy , or wheel fiddle .
so , these are the different kinds and shapes of the hurdy - gurdy .
the hurdy - gurdy is the only musical instrument that uses a crank to turn a wheel to rub strings , like the bow of a violin , to produce music .
it has three different kinds of strings . the first string is the drone string , which plays a continuous sound like the bagpipe .
the second string is a melody string , which is played with a wooden keyboard tuned like a piano .
and the third string is pretty innovative .
it 's also the only instrument that uses this kind of technique .
it activates what 's called the buzzing bridge , or the dog .
when i turn the crank and i apply pressure , it makes a sound like a barking dog .
so all of this is pretty innovative , if you consider that the hurdy - gurdy appeared about a thousand years ago
and it took two people to play it ; one to turn the crank , and another person -- yes -- to play the melody by physically pulling up large wooden pegs .
luckily , all of this changed a couple of centuries later . so , one person could actually play and almost -- this is pretty heavy -- carry the hurdy - gurdy .
the hurdy - gurdy has been used , historically , through the centuries in mostly dance music because of the uniqueness of the melody combined with the acoustic boombox here .
and today , the hurdy - gurdy is used in all sorts of music -- traditional folk music , dance , contemporary and world music -- in the u.k. , in france , in spain and in italy .
and this kind of hurdy - gurdy takes anywhere from three to five years [ to order and receive it ] .
it 's made by specialized luthiers , also in europe .
and it 's very difficult to tune . so without further ado , would you like to hear it ?
caroline phillips : i did n't hear you . would you like to hear it ?
cp : okay .
there i go .
i 'd like to sing in basque , which is the language spoken in the basque country where i live , in the region in france and spain .
[ basque ]
thank you .
this is a song that i wrote based on traditional basque rhythms .
and this is a song that has a kind of a celtic feel .
