thank you . i have to tell you i 'm both challenged and excited .
my excitement is : i get a chance to give something back .
my challenge is : the shortest seminar i usually do is 50 hours .
i 'm not exaggerating . i do weekends , and what i do -- i do even more than that , obviously , coach people -- but i 'm into immersion . because how did you learn language ?
you did n't learn it by just learning principles , you got in it and you did it so often that it became real .
and the bottom line of why i 'm here , besides being a crazy mofo , is that i 'm really in a position -- i 'm not here to motivate you , obviously ; you do n't need that .
and a lot of times that 's what people think i do , and it 's the furthest thing from it . what happens , though , is people say to me , " i do n't need any motivation . "
and i say , " well , that 's interesting . that 's not what i do . "
i 'm the " why " guy . i want to know why you do what you do .
what is your motive for action ?
what is it that drives you in your life today ? not 10 years ago .
or are you running the same pattern ? because i believe that the invisible force of internal drive , activated , is the most important thing in the world .
i 'm here because i believe emotion is the force of life .
all of us here have great minds .
you know ? most of us here have great minds , right ?
i do n't know about another category , but we all know how to think .
and with our minds we can rationalize anything .
we can make anything happen . we can -- i agree with what was described a few days ago , about this idea that people work in their self - interest .
but we all know that that 's bullshit at times .
you do n't work in your self - interest all the time , because when emotion comes into it , the wiring changes in the way it functions .
and so it 's wonderful for us to think intellectually about how the life of the world is , and especially those who are very smart -- we can play this game in our head .
but i really want to know what 's driving you .
and what i would like to maybe invite you to do by the end of this talk is explore where you are today , for two reasons . one : so that you can contribute more . and two : so that hopefully we can not just understand other people more , but maybe appreciate them more , and create the kinds of connections that can stop some of the challenges that we face in our society today .
they 're only going to get magnified by the very technology that 's connecting us , because it 's making us intersect . and that intersection does n't always create the view of " everybody now understands everybody , and everybody appreciates everybody . " so , i 've had an obsession basically for 30 years , and that obsession has been , " what makes the difference in the quality of peoples lives ?
what makes the difference in their performance ? " because that 's what i got hired to do .
i 've got to produce the result now .
that 's what i 've done for 30 years . i get the phone call when the athlete is burning down on national television , and they were ahead by five strokes and now they ca n't get back on the course .
and i 've got to do something right now to get the result or nothing matters . i get the phone call when the child is going commit suicide , and i 've got to do something right now . and in 29 years -- i 'm very grateful to tell you i 've never lost one in 29 years .
it does n't mean i wo n't some day . but i have n't done it , and the reason is an understanding of these human needs that i want to talk to you about .
so , when i get those calls about performance , that 's one thing .
how do you make a change ?
but also , i 'm looking to see what is it that 's shaping that person 's ability to contribute , to do something beyond themselves . so maybe the real question is , you know , i look at life and say , there 's two master lessons .
one is : there 's the science of achievement , which almost everything that 's run is mastered to an amazing extent .
that 's " how do you take the invisible and make it visible , " right ?
how do you take what you 're dreaming of and make it happen ?
whether it be your business , your contribution to society , money -- whatever it is for you -- your body , your family . but the other lesson of life that is rarely mastered is the art of fulfillment .
because science is easy , right ?
we know the rules . you write the code . you follow the -- and you get the results . once you know the game you just , you know , you up the ante , do n't you ?
but when it comes to fulfillment -- that 's an art .
and the reason is , it 's about appreciation and it 's about contribution . you can only feel so much by yourself .
so , i 've had an interesting laboratory to try to answer the question of the real question , which is what 's the difference in somebody 's life if you look at somebody like those people that you 've given everything to ? like all the resources they say they need . you gave them not a 100 - dollar computer ; you gave them the best computer . you gave them love ; you gave them joy . you were there to comfort them .
and those people very often -- and you know some of them , i 'm sure -- end up the rest of their life with all this love , education , money and background , spending their life going in and out of rehab . and then you meet people that have been through ultimate pain -- psychologically , sexually , spiritually , emotionally abused -- and not always , but often , they become some of the people that contribute the most to society .
so , the question we 've got to ask ourselves really is , what is it ?
what is it that shapes us ? and we live in a therapy culture .
most of us do n't do that , but the culture 's a therapy culture .
and what i mean by that is the mindset that we are our past .
and everybody in this room -- you would n't be in this room if you bought that theory -- but the -- most of society thinks biography is destiny .
the past equals the future . and of course it does if you live there .
but what people in this room know , and what we have to remind ourselves , though -- because you can know something intellectually , you can know what to do and then not use it , not apply it .
so really , we 're going to remind ourselves that decision is the ultimate power . that 's what it really is .
now , when you ask people , you know , have you failed to achieve something ?
how many have ever failed to achieve something significant in your life ? say , " aye . " audience : aye .
tr : thanks for the interaction on a high level there .
but if you ask people , why did n't you achieve something ?
somebody who 's working for you , you know , or a partner , or even yourself . when you fail to achieve a goal , what 's the reason people say they fail to achieve ?
what do they tell you ? do n't have the -- did n't know enough , did n't have the -- knowledge . did n't have the -- money .
did n't have the -- time . did n't have the -- technology . you know ,
i did n't have the right manager . did n't have the ... al gore : supreme court . tr : and -- and -- -- what do all those , including the supreme court , have in common ?
they are a claim to you missing resources , and they may be accurate .
you may not have the money ; you may not have the supreme court ; but that is not the defining factor .
and you correct me if i 'm wrong .
the defining factor is never resources ; it 's resourcefulness .
and what i mean specifically , rather than just some phrase , is if you have emotion , human emotion , something that i experienced from you a day before yesterday at a level that is as profound as i 've ever experienced , and if you 'd communicated with that emotion i believe you would have beat his ass and won .
but , how easy for me to tell him what he should do .
idiot , robbins . but i know when we watched the debate at that time , there were emotions that blocked people 's ability to get this man 's intellect and capacity .
and the way that it came across to some people on that day -- because i know people that wanted to vote in your direction and did n't , and i was upset . but there was emotion that was there .
how many know what i 'm talking about here ? say , " aye . "
audience : aye .
tr : so , emotion is it . and if we get the right emotion , we can get ourselves to do anything . we can get through it .
if you 're creative enough , playful enough , fun enough , can you get through to anybody ? yes or no ?
audience : yes . tr : if you do n't have the money , but you 're creative and determined enough , you find the way . so this is the ultimate resource .
but this is not the story that people tell us , right ?
the story people tell us is a bunch of different stories .
they tell us we do n't have the resources , but ultimately , if you take a look here -- flip it up , if you would -- they say , what are all the reasons they have n't accomplished that ?
next one , please . he 's broken my pattern , that son - of - a - bitch .
but i appreciated the energy , i 'll tell you that .
what determines your resources ? we 've said decisions shape destiny , which is my focus here . if decisions shape destiny , what determines it is three decisions . what are you going to focus on ?
right now , you have to decide what you 're going to focus on .
in this second , consciously or unconsciously , the minute you decide to focus on something you 've got to give it a meaning , and whatever that meaning is produces emotion .
is this the end or the beginning ? is god punishing me or rewarding me , or is this the roll of the dice ?
an emotion , then , creates what we 're going to do or the action .
so , think about your own life ,
the decisions that have shaped your destiny .
and that sounds really heavy , but in the last five or 10 years , 15 years , how have there been some decisions you 've made that if you 'd made a different decision , your life would be completely different ? how many can think about it ?
honestly , better or worse ? say , " aye . "
audience : aye . tr : so the bottom line is , maybe it was where to go to work , and you met the love of your life there .
maybe it was a career decision . i know the google geniuses i saw here -- i mean , i understand that their decision was to sell their technology at first . what if they made that decision versus to build their own culture ? how would the world be different ?
how would their lives be different ? their impact ?
the history of our world is these decisions .
when a woman stands up and says , " no , i wo n't go to the back of the bus , " she did n't just affect her life . that decision shaped our culture .
or someone standing in front of a tank . or being in a position like lance armstrong , and someone says to you , " you 've got testicular cancer . " that 's pretty tough for any male , especially if you ride a bike .
you 've got it in your brain ; you 've got it in your lungs .
but what was his decision of what to focus on ?
different than most people . what did it mean ?
it was n't the end ; it was the beginning . what am i going to do ?
he goes off and wins seven championships he never once won before the cancer , because he got emotional fitness , psychological strength . that 's the difference in human beings that i 've seen of the three million that i 've been around .
because that 's about my lab. i 've had three million people from 80 different countries that i 've had a chance to interact with over the last 29 years . and after a while , patterns become obvious .
you see that south america and africa may be connected in a certain way , right ? other people say , " oh , that sounds ridiculous . " it 's simple . so , what shaped lance ?
what shapes you ? two invisible forces . very quickly . one : state .
we all have had time .
so if you had a time you did something , and after you did it you thought to yourself , i ca n't believe i said that , i ca n't believe i did that , that was so stupid -- who 's been there ?
say , " aye . " audience : aye .
tr : have you ever done something , after you did it , you go , " that was me ! " right ? it was n't your ability ; it was your state .
your model of the world is what shapes you long term .
your model of the world is the filter . that 's what 's shaping us .
that 's what makes people make decisions .
when we want to influence somebody , we 've got to know what already influences them .
and it 's made up of three parts , i believe .
first , what 's your target ? what are you after ?
which , i believe -- it 's not your desires .
you can get your desires or goals . how many have ever got a goal or desire and thought , is this all there is ?
how many have been there ? say , " aye . " audience : aye .
tr : so , it 's needs we have . i believe there are six human needs .
second , once you know what the target that 's driving you is and you uncover it for the truth -- you do n't form it ; you uncover it -- then you find out what 's your map , what 's the belief systems that are telling you how to get those needs .
some people think the way to get those needs is destroy the world , some people is to build something , create something , love someone .
and then there 's the fuel you pick . so very quickly , six needs .
let me tell you what they are . first one : certainty .
now , these are not goals or desires , these are universal .
everyone needs certainty that they can avoid pain and at least be comfortable . now , how do you get it ?
control everybody ? develop a skill ? give up ? smoke a cigarette ?
and if you got totally certain , ironically , even though we all need that -- like if you 're not certain about your health , or your children , or money , you do n't think about much .
you 're not sure if the ceiling 's going to hold up , you 're not going to listen to any speaker .
but , while we go for certainty differently , if we get total certainty , we get what ? what do you feel if you 're certain ?
you know what 's going to happen , when it 's going to happen ,
how it 's going to happen -- what would you feel ?
bored out of your minds . so , god , in her infinite wisdom , gave us a second human need , which is uncertainty .
we need variety . we need surprise .
how many of you here love surprises ? say , " aye . " audience : aye .
tr : bullshit . you like the surprises you want .
the ones you do n't want you call problems , but you need them .
so , variety is important . have you ever rented a video or a film that you 've already seen ? who 's done this ? get a fucking life .
all right . why are you doing it ? you 're certain it 's good because you read it before , saw it before , but you 're hoping it 's been long enough you 've forgotten , that there 's variety .
third human need , critical : significance . we all need to feel important , special , unique . you can get it by making more money .
you can do it by being more spiritual . you can do it by getting yourself in a situation where you put more tattoos and earrings in places humans do n't want to know .
whatever it takes . the fastest way to do this , if you have no background , no culture , no belief and resources or resourcefulness , is violence . if i put a gun to your head and i live in the ' hood , instantly i 'm significant .
zero to 10. how high ? 10. how certain am i that you 're going to respond to me ? 10. how much uncertainty ?
who knows what 's going to happen next ? kind of exciting .
like climbing up into a cave and doing that stuff all the way down there . total variety and uncertainty .
and it 's significant , is n't it ? so you want to risk your life for it .
so that 's why violence has always been around and will be around unless we have a consciousness change as a species .
now , you can get significance a million ways , but to be significant , you 've got to be unique and different .
here 's what we really need : connection and love -- fourth need .
we all want it . most people settle for connection because love 's too scary . do n't want to get hurt .
who here has ever been hurt in an intimate relationship ? say , " aye . "
if you do n't raise your hand , you 'll have had other shit too , come on .
and you 're going to get hurt again .
are n't you glad you came to this positive visit ?
but here 's what 's true -- we need it . we can do it through intimacy , through friendship , through prayer , through walking in nature .
if nothing else works for you , get a dog . do n't get a cat . get a dog ,
because if you leave for two minutes , it 's like you 've been gone for six months when you show back up again five minutes later , right ?
now , these first four needs , every human finds a way to meet .
even if you lie to yourself , you need to have split personalities .
but the last two needs -- the first four needs are called the needs of the personalities , is what i call it -- the last two are the needs of the spirit .
and this is where fulfillment comes . you wo n't get fulfillment from the first four . you 'll figure a way -- smoke , drink , do whatever -- to meet the first four , but the last two -- number five : you must grow . we all know the answer here .
if you do n't grow , you 're what ? if a relationship 's not growing , if a business is not growing , if you 're not growing , it does n't matter how much money you have , how many friends you have , how many people love you , you feel like hell . and the reason we grow , i believe , is so we have something to give of value .
because the sixth need is to contribute beyond ourselves .
because we all know , corny as it sounds , the secret to living is giving . we all know life 's not about me ; it 's about we . this culture knows that . this room knows that .
and it 's exciting . when you see nicholas up here talking about his $ 100 computer , the most passionate exciting thing is : here 's a genius , but he 's got a calling now .
you can feel the difference in him and it 's beautiful .
and that calling can touch other people . in my own life , my life was touched because when i was 11 years old ,
thanksgiving , no money , no food -- we 're not going to starve , but my father was totally messed up . my mom was letting him know how bad he messed up . and somebody came to the door and delivered food . my father made three decisions .
i know what they were briefly . his focus was : " this is charity .
what does it mean ? i 'm worthless . what 've i got to do ? leave my family . " which he did . the time was one of the most painful experiences of life . my three decisions gave me a different path .
i said , " focus on : ' there 's food ' " -- what a concept , you know .
second -- but this is what changed my life , this is what shaped me as a human being -- " somebody 's gift . i do n't even know who it is . " my father always said , " no one gives a shit . " and all of a sudden , somebody i do n't know , they 're not asking for anything , they 're just giving our family food , looking out for us . it made me believe this : " what does it mean that strangers care ? " and what that made me decide is , if strangers care about me and my family , i care about them .
what am i going to do ? i 'm going to do something to make a difference . so , when i was 17 , i went out one day on thanksgiving . it was my target for years to have enough money to feed two families .
the most fun thing i ever did in my life , the most moving .
then next year i did four . i did n't tell anybody what i was doing .
next year eight . i was n't doing it for brownie points , but after eight , i thought , shit , i could use some help .
so sure enough , i went out and what did i do ?
i got my friends involved and i grew companies and then i got 11 companies and i built the foundation .
now , 18 years later , i 'm proud to tell you , last year we fed two million people in 35 countries through our foundation , all during the holidays : thanksgiving , christmas -- -- in all the different countries around the world .
it 's been fantastic .
thank you .
so , i do n't tell you that to brag ; i tell you because i 'm proud of human beings , because they get excited to contribute once they 've had the chance to experience it , not talk about it .
so , finally -- and i 'm about out of time -- the target that shapes you -- here 's what 's different about people . we have the same needs , but are you a certainty freak ? is that what you value most , or uncertainty ? this man here could n't be a certainty freak if he climbed through those caves . are you driven by significance or love ? we all need all six , but whatever your lead system is , tilts you in a different direction .
and as you move in a direction , you have a destination or destiny .
the second piece is the map . think of that as the operating system that tells you how to get there . and some people 's map is : " i 'm going to save lives even if i die for other people , " and they 're firemen . somebody else is : " i 'm going to kill people to do it . " they 're trying to meet the same needs of significance , right ? they want to honor god or honor their family , but they have a different map .
and there are seven different beliefs . i ca n't go through them because i 'm done . the last piece is emotion .
i 'd say one of the parts of the map is like time . some people 's idea of a long time is 100 years . somebody else 's is three seconds , which is what i have .
and the last one i 've already mentioned , that fell to you .
if you 've got a target and you 've got a map and let 's say -- i ca n't use google because i love macs and they have n't made it good for macs yet -- so if you use mapquest -- how many have made this fatal mistake of using mapquest at some time ?
you use this thing and you do n't get there . well , imagine if your beliefs guarantee you can never get to where you want to go ?
the last thing is emotion .
now , here 's what i 'll tell you about emotion . there are 6,000 emotions that we all have words for in the english language , which is just a linguistic representation , right , that changes by language . but if your dominant emotions -- if i had more time , i have 20,000 people or 1,000 , and i have them write down all the emotions that they experience in an average week , and i gave them as long as they needed ,
and on one side they write empowering emotions , the other 's disempowering --
guess how many emotions people experience ? less than 12 .
and half of those make them feel like shit . so they got five or six good frickin ' feelings , right ? it 's like they feel " happy , happy , excited , oh shit , frustrated , frustrated , overwhelmed , depressed . " how many of you know somebody who no matter what happens finds a way to get pissed off ? how many know somebody like this ?
or , no matter what happens , they find a way to be happy or excited .
how may know somebody like this ? come on .
when 9/11 happened -- i 'll finish with this -- i was in hawaii .
i was with 2,000 people from 45 countries . we were translating four languages simultaneously for a program that i was conducting for a week . the night before was called " emotional mastering . " i got up , had no plan for the this , and i said -- we had all these fireworks -- i do crazy shit , fun stuff -- and then at the end i stopped -- i had this plan i was going to say but i never do what i 'm going to say . and all of a sudden i said , " when do people really start to live ? when they face death . " and then i went through this whole thing about , if you were n't going to get off this island , if nine days from now you were going to die , who would you call , what would you say , what would you do ? one woman -- well , that night is when 9/11 happened -- one woman had come to the seminar and when she came there , her previous boyfriend had been kidnapped and murdered .
her friend , her new boyfriend , wanted to marry her , and she said no.
he said , " if you leave and go to that hawaii thing , it 's over with us . " she said , " it 's over . " when i finished that night , she called him and left a message -- true story -- at the top of the world trade center where he worked , saying , " honey , i love you , i just want you to know i want to marry you . it was stupid of me . " she was asleep , because it was 3 a.m. for us , when he called her back from the top and said , " honey , i ca n't tell you what this means . " he said , " i do n't know how to tell you this , but you gave me the greatest gift because i 'm going to die . " and she played the recording for us in the room .
she was on larry king later , and he said , " you 're probably wondering how on earth this could happen to you twice . " and he said , " all i can say to you is , this must be god 's message to you , honey . from now on , every day give your all , love your all .
do n't let anything ever stop you . " she finishes , and a man stands up and he says , " i 'm from pakistan ; i 'm a muslim .
i 'd love to hold your hand and say i 'm sorry , but , frankly , this is retribution . " i ca n't tell you the rest because i 'm out of time .
10 seconds .
10 seconds , that 's all . i want to be respectful . 10 seconds .
all i can tell you is , i brought this man on stage with a man from new york who worked in the world trade center , because i had about 200 new yorkers there . more than 50 lost their entire companies , their friends , marking off their palm pilots -- one financial trader , this woman made of steel , bawling -- 30 friends crossing off that all died .
and what i did to people is said , " what are we going to focus on ?
what does this mean and what are we going to do ? " and i took the group and got people to focus on : if you did n't lose somebody today , your focus is going to be how to serve somebody else . there are people -- then one woman got up and she was so angry and screaming and yelling .
then i found out she was n't from new york ; she 's not an american ; she does n't know anybody here . i said , " do you always get angry ? " she said , " yes . " guilty people got guilty , sad people got sad .
and i took these two men and did what i call an indirect negotiation .
jewish man with family in the occupied territory , someone in new york who would have died if he was at work that day , and this man who wanted to be a terrorist and made it very clear .
and the integration that happened is on a film , which i 'll be happy to send you , so you can really see what actually happened instead of my verbalization of it ,
but the two of them not only came together and changed their beliefs and morals of the world , but they worked together to bring , for almost four years now , through various mosques and synagogues , the idea of how to create peace . and he wrote a book , which is called " my jihad , my way of peace . " so , transformation can happen .
so my invitation to you is this : explore your web , the web in here -- the needs , the beliefs , the emotions that are controlling you ,
for two reasons : so there 's more of you to give -- and achieve too , we all want to do it -- but i mean give , because that 's what 's going to fill you up . and secondly , so you can appreciate -- not just understand , that 's intellectual , that 's the mind -- but appreciate what 's driving other people .
it 's the only way our world 's going to change . god bless you .
thank you . i hope this was of service .
