hawa abdi : many people -- 20 years for somalia -- [ were ] fighting .
so there was no job , no food .
children , most of them , became very malnourished , like this .
deqo mohamed : so as you know , always in a civil war , the ones affected most [ are ] the women and children .
so our patients are women and children .
and they are in our backyard .
it 's our home . we welcome them .
that 's the camp that we have in now 90,000 people , where 75 percent of them are women and children .
pat mitchell : and this is your hospital . this is the inside .
ha : we are doing c - sections and different operations because people need some help .
there is no government to protect them .
dm : every morning we have about 400 patients , maybe more or less .
but sometimes we are only five doctors and 16 nurses , and we are physically getting exhausted to see all of them .
but we take the severe ones , and we reschedule the other ones the next day .
it is very tough .
and as you can see , it 's the women who are carrying the children ; it 's the women who come into the hospitals ; it 's the women [ are ] building the houses .
that 's their house .
and we have a school . this is our bright -- we opened [ in the ] last two years [ an ] elementary school where we have 850 children , and the majority are women and girls .
pm : and the doctors have some very big rules about who can get treated at the clinic .
would you explain the rules for admission ?
ha : the people who are coming to us , we are welcoming .
we are sharing with them whatever we have .
but there are only two rules .
first rule : there is no clan distinguished and political division in somali society .
[ whomever ] makes those things we throw out .
the second : no man can beat his wife .
if he beat , we will put [ him ] in jail , and we will call the eldest people .
until they identify this case , we 'll never release him .
that 's our two rules .
the other thing that i have realized , that the woman is the most strong person all over the world .
because the last 20 years , the somali woman has stood up .
they were the leaders , and we are the leaders of our community and the hope of our future generations .
we are not just the helpless and the victims of the civil war .
we can reconcile .
we can do everything .
dm : as my mother said , we are the future hope , and the men are only killing in somalia .
so we came up with these two rules .
in a camp with 90,000 people , you have to come up with some rules or there is going to be some fights .
so there is no clan division , and no man can beat his wife .
and we have a little storage room where we converted a jail .
so if you beat your wife , you 're going to be there .
so empowering the women and giving the opportunity -- we are there for them . they are not alone for this .
pm : you 're running a medical clinic .
it brought much , much needed medical care to people who would n't get it .
you 're also running a civil society .
you 've created your own rules , in which women and children are getting a different sense of security .
talk to me about your decision , dr. abdi , and your decision , dr. mohamed , to work together -- for you to become a doctor and to work with your mother in these circumstances .
ha : my age -- because i was born in 1947 -- we were having , at that time , government , law and order .
but one day , i went to the hospital -- my mother was sick -- and i saw the hospital , how they [ were ] treating the doctors , how they [ are ] committed to help the sick people .
i admired them , and i decided to become a doctor .
my mother died , unfortunately , when i was 12 years [ old ] .
then my father allowed me to proceed [ with ] my hope .
my mother died in [ a ] gynecology complication , so i decided to become a gynecology specialist .
that 's why i became a doctor .
so dr. deqo has to explain .
dm : for me , my mother was preparing [ me ] when i was a child to become a doctor , but i really did n't want to .
maybe i should become an historian , or maybe a reporter .
i loved it , but it did n't work .
when the war broke out -- civil war -- i saw how my mother was helping and how she really needed the help , and how the care is essential to the woman to be a woman doctor in somalia and help the women and children .
and i thought , maybe i can be a reporter and doctor gynecologist .
so i went to russia , and my mother also , [ during the ] time of [ the ] soviet union .
so some of our character , maybe we will come with a strong soviet background of training .
so that 's how i decided [ to do ] the same .
my sister was different .
she 's here . she 's also a doctor .
she graduated in russia also .
and to go back and to work with our mother is just what we saw in the civil war -- when i was 16 , and my sister was 11 , when the civil war broke out .
so it was the need and the people we saw in the early '90s -- that 's what made us go back and work for them .
pm : so what is the biggest challenge working , mother and daughter , in such dangerous and sometimes scary situations ?
ha : yes , i was working in a tough situation , very dangerous .
and when i saw the people who needed me , i was staying with them to help , because i [ could ] do something for them .
most people fled abroad .
but i remained with those people , and i was trying to do something -- [ any ] little thing i [ could ] do .
i succeeded in my place .
now my place is 90,000 people who are respecting each other , who are not fighting .
but we try to stand on our feet , to do something , little things , we can for our people .
and i 'm thankful for my daughters .
when they come to me , they help me to treat the people , to help .
they do everything for them .
they have done what i desire to do for them .
pm : what 's the best part of working with your mother , and the most challenging part for you ?
dm : she 's very tough ; it 's most challenging .
she always expects us to do more .
and really when you think [ you ] cannot do it , she will push you , and i can do it .
that 's the best part .
she shows us , trains us how to do and how to be better [ people ] and how to do long hours in surgery -- 300 patients per day , 10 , 20 surgeries , and still you have to manage the camp -- that 's how she trains us .
it is not like beautiful offices here , 20 patients , you 're tired .
you see 300 patients , 20 surgeries and 90,000 people to manage .
pm : but you do it for good reasons .
wait . wait .
ha : thank you .
dm : thank you .
ha : thank you very much . dm : thank you very much .
