i want to say that really and truly , after these incredible speeches and ideas that are being spread , i am in the awkward position of being here to talk to you today about television .
so most everyone watches tv .
we like it . we like some parts of it .
here in america , people actually love tv .
the average american watches tv for almost 5 hours a day .
okay ?
now i happen to make my living these days in television , so for me , that 's a good thing .
but a lot of people do n't love it so much .
they , in fact , berate it .
they call it stupid , and worse , believe me .
my mother , growing up , she called it the " idiot box . "
but my idea today is not to debate whether there 's such a thing as good tv or bad tv ; my idea today is to tell you that i believe television has a conscience .
so why i believe that television has a conscience is that i actually believe that television directly reflects the moral , political , social and emotional need states of our nation -- that television is how we actually disseminate our entire value system .
so all these things are uniquely human , and they all add up to our idea of conscience .
now today , we 're not talking about good and bad tv .
we 're talking about popular tv .
we 're talking about top - 10 nielsen - rated shows over the course of 50 years .
how do these nielsen ratings reflect not just what you 've heard about , which is the idea of our social , collective unconscious , but how do these top - 10 nielsen - rated shows over 50 years reflect the idea of our social conscience ?
how does television evolve over time , and what does this say about our society ?
now speaking of evolution , from basic biology , you probably remember that the animal kingdom , including humans , have four basic primal instincts .
you have hunger ; you have sex ; you have power ; and you have the urge for acquisitiveness .
as humans , what 's important to remember is that we 've developed , we 've evolved over time to temper , or tame , these basic animal instincts .
we have the capacity to laugh and cry .
we feel awe , we feel pity .
that is separate and apart from the animal kingdom .
the other thing about human beings is that we love to be entertained .
we love to watch tv .
this is something that clearly separates us from the animal kingdom .
animals might love to play , but they do n't love to watch .
so i had an ambition to discover what could be understood from this uniquely human relationship between television programs and the human conscious .
why has television entertainment evolved the way it has ?
i kind of think of it as this cartoon devil or angel sitting on our shoulders .
is television literally functioning as our conscience , tempting us and rewarding us at the same time ?
so to begin to answer these questions , we did a research study .
we went back 50 years to the 1959/1960 television season .
we surveyed the top - 20 nielsen shows every year for 50 years -- a thousand shows .
we talked to over 3,000 individuals -- almost 3,600 -- aged 18 to 70 , and we asked them how they felt emotionally .
how did you feel watching every single one of these shows ?
did you feel a sense of moral ambiguity ?
did you feel outrage ? did you laugh ?
what did this mean for you ?
so to our global ted audiences , i want to say that this was a u.s. sample .
but as you can see , these emotional need states are truly universal .
and on a factual basis , over 80 percent of the u.s. 's most popular shows are exported around the world .
so i really hope our global audiences can relate .
two acknowledgments before our first data slide : for inspiring me to even think about the idea of conscience and the tricks that conscience can play on us on a daily basis , i thank legendary rabbi , jack stern .
and for the way in which i 'm going to present the data , i want to thank ted community superstar hans rosling , who you may have just seen .
okay , here we go .
so here you see , from 1960 to 2010 , the 50 years of our study .
two things we 're going to start with -- the inspiration state and the moral ambiguity state , which , for this purpose , we defined inspiration as television shows that uplift me , that make me feel much more positive about the world .
moral ambiguity are televisions shows in which i do n't understand the difference between right and wrong .
as we start , you see in 1960 inspiration is holding steady .
that 's what we 're watching tv for .
moral ambiguity starts to climb .
right at the end of the 60s , moral ambiguity is going up , inspiration is kind of on the wane .
why ?
the cuban missile crisis , jfk is shot , the civil rights movement , race riots , the vietnam war , mlk is shot , bobby kennedy is shot , watergate .
look what happens .
in 1970 , inspiration plummets .
moral ambiguity takes off .
they cross , but ronald reagan , a telegenic president , is in office .
it 's trying to recover .
but look , it ca n't : aids , iran - contra , the challenger disaster , chernobyl .
moral ambiguity becomes the dominant meme in television from 1990 for the next 20 years .
take a look at this .
this chart is going to document a very similar trend .
but in this case , we have comfort -- the bubble in red -- social commentary and irreverence in blue and green .
now this time on tv you have " bonanza , " do n't forget , you have " gunsmoke , " you have " andy griffith , " you have domestic shows all about comfort .
this is rising . comfort stays whole .
irreverence starts to rise .
social commentary is all of a sudden spiking up .
you get to 1969 , and look what happens .
you have comfort , irreverence , and social commentary , not only battling it out in our society , but you literally have two establishment shows -- " gunsmoke " and " gomer pyle " -- in 1969 are the number - two - and number - three - rated television shows .
what 's number one ?
the socially irreverent hippie show , " rowan and martin 's laugh - in . "
they 're all living together , right .
viewers had responded dramatically .
look at this green spike in 1966 to a bellwether show .
when you guys hear this industry term , a breakout hit , what does that mean ?
it means in the 1966 television season , the " smothers brothers " came out of nowhere .
this was the first show that allowed viewers to say , " my god , i can comment on how i feel about the vietnam war , about the presidency , through television ? "
that 's what we mean by a breakout show .
so then , just like the last chart , look what happens .
in 1970 , the dam bursts . the dam bursts .
comfort is no longer why we watch television .
social commentary and irreverence rise throughout the 70s .
now look at this .
the 70s means who ? norman lear .
you have " all in the family , " " sanford and son , " and the dominant show -- in the top - 10 for the entire 70s -- " m * a * s * h. "
in the entire 50 years of television that we studied , seven of 10 shows ranked most highly for irreverence appeared on air during the vietnam war , five of the top - 10 during the nixon administration .
only one generation , 20 years in , and we discovered , wow ! tv can do that ?
it can make me feel this ?
it can change us ?
so to this very , very savvy crowd , i also want to note the digital folks did not invent disruptive .
archie bunker was shoved out of his easy chair along with the rest of us 40 years ago .
this is a quick chart . here 's another attribute : fantasy and imagination , which are shows defined as , " takes me out of my everyday realm " and " makes me feel better . "
that 's mapped against the red dot , unemployment , which is a simple bureau of labor department statistic .
you 'll see that every time fantasy and imagination shows rise , it maps to a spike in unemployment .
do we want to see shows about people saving money and being unemployed ?
no. in the 70s you have the bellwether show " the bionic woman " that rocketed into the top - 10 in 1973 , followed by the " six million - dollar man " and " charlie 's angels . "
another spike in the 1980s -- another spike in shows about control and power .
what were those shows ?
glamorous and rich .
" dallas , " " fantasy island . "
incredible mapping of our national psyche with some hard and fast facts : unemployment .
so here you are , in my favorite chart , because this is our last 20 years .
whether or not you 're in my business , you have surely heard or read of the decline of the thing called the three - camera sitcom and the rise of reality tv .
well , as we say in the business , x marks the spot .
the 90s -- the big bubbles of humor -- we 're watching " friends , " " frasier , " " cheers " and " seinfeld . "
everything 's good , low unemployment .
but look : x marks the spot .
in 2001 , the september 2001 television season , humor succumbs to judgment once and for all .
why not ?
we had a 2000 presidential election decided by the supreme court .
we had the bursting of the tech bubble .
we had 9/11 .
anthrax becomes part of the social lexicon .
look what happens when we keep going .
at the turn of the century , the internet takes off , reality television has taken hold .
what do people want in their tv then ?
i would have thought revenge or nostalgia .
give me some comfort ; my world is falling apart .
no , they want judgment .
i can vote you off the island .
i can keep sarah palin 's daughter dancing .
i can choose the next american idol . you 're fired .
that 's all great , right ?
so as dramatically different as these television shows , pure entertainment , have been over the last 50 years -- what did i start with ? -- one basic instinct remains .
we 're animals , we need our moms .
there has not been a decade of television without a definitive , dominant tv mom .
the 1950s : june cleever in the original comfort show , " leave it to beaver . "
lucille ball kept us laughing through the rise of social consciousness in the 60s .
maude findlay , the epitome of the irreverent 1970s , who tackled abortion , divorce , even menopause on tv .
the 1980s , our first cougar was given to us in the form of alexis carrington .
murphy brown took on a vice president when she took on the idea of single parenthood .
this era 's mom , bree van de kamp .
now i do n't know if this is the devil or the angel sitting on our conscience , sitting on television 's shoulders , but i do know that i absolutely love this image .
so to you all , the women of tedwomen , the men of tedwomen , the global audiences of tedwomen , thank you for letting me present my idea about the conscience of television .
but let me also thank the incredible creators who get up everyday to put their ideas on our television screens throughout all these ages of television .
they give it life on television , for sure , but it 's you as viewers , through your collective social consciences , that give it life , longevity , power or not .
so thanks very much .
