natalie macmaster : i 'm going to just quickly start out with a little bit of music here .
thank you !
i took my shoes off to dance , but maybe i 'll get at that later .
anyways , i. .. where to start ?
well , i 'm really excited to talk a bit about my own upbringing in music and family and all of that , but i 'm even more excited for you people to hear about donnell 's amazing family and maybe even a little bit about how we met , and all that sort of thing , but for those of you that may not be familiar with my upbringing , i 'm from cape breton island , nova scotia , eastern canada , which is a very , very musical island , and its origins come from scotland with the music and all the traditions , the dancing , the language , which unfortunately is dying out in cape breton .
the traditional language is gaelic , but a lot of the music came from the gaelic language , and the dancing and the singing and everything , and my bloodline is scottish through and through , but my mother and father are two very , very musical people .
my mom taught me to dance when i was five , and my dad taught me to play fiddle when i was nine .
my uncle is a very well - known cape breton fiddler .
his name 's buddy macmaster , and just a wonderful guy , and we have a great tradition at home called square dancing , and we had parties , great parties at our house and the neighbors ' houses , and you talk about kitchen cèilidhs .
well , cèilidh first of all is gaelic for party , but kitchen party in cape breton is very common , and basically somebody drops into the house , and no matter what house you go to in cape breton , there 's a fiddle there , guaranteed , and i 'd say , well there 's first of all more fiddlers per capita in cape breton than anywhere in the world , so ten chances to one , the fellow who walked in the door could play it , so you 'd have someone come into the house , you 'd invite them to play a tune , and lo and behold a little party would start up and somebody would dance , and somebody would sing , and all that sort of thing , so it was a wonderful , wonderful way to grow up , and that is where my beginnings in music come from : my surroundings , my family , just my bloodline in itself , and , oh , i 've done lots of things with my music .
i 've recorded lots of cds .
i was nominated for a grammy and i 've won some awards and stuff like that , so that 's awesome , but the best part was meeting my husband , and i 've actually known donnell for probably 12 years now , and i 'm going to get into a little bit of , i guess , how music brought us together , but i 'm going to introduce you right now to my new husband as of october 5 , donnell leahy .
donnell leahy : thank you . i 'm kind of new to the ted experience and i 'm glad to be here , but i 'm just trying to put it all together , trying to figure all you people out , and i 've been here for a short while , and i 'm starting to understand a little bit better .
so i asked natalie , what do i do ?
and she said , just talk about yourself .
it 's kind of boring , but i 'll just tell you a little bit about my family . i 'm one of 11 brothers and sisters from lakefield , ontario , an hour and a half northeast of toronto , and we grew up on a farm .
mom and dad raised beef cattle , and i 'm the oldest boy .
there are four girls a little bit older than me .
we grew up without a television .
people find that strange , but i think it was a great blessing for us .
we had a television for a few years , but of course we wasted so much time and the work was n't getting done , so out went the television .
we grew up playing -- mom 's from cape breton , coincidentally .
mom and natalie 's mother knew each other . we grew up playing , and used to dance together , right , yeah .
we grew up playing a bunch of , we played by ear and i think that 's important for us because we were not really exposed to a lot of different styles of music .
we learned to play the instruments , but we kind of had to come from within or go from within , because we did n't watch television , we did n't listen to a lot of radio . we went to church and to school sometimes , and farmed and played music , so we were able , i think , at a very critical age to develop our own style , our own self , and my mother plays , my father plays , and the style that came from the ottawa valley in ontario , we call it french - canadian style but it originated in logging camps .
years ago , hundreds of men would go up for the winter to the camps in northern ontario and in quebec , and they were all different cultures , and the irish , the french , scottish , german , they 'd all meet , and of course at night , they 'd play cards and step dance and play fiddles , and over the course of many years , the ottawa valley fiddling kind of evolved and the ottawa valley step dancing evolved , so that 's , i kind of started out with that style and i quickly started doing my own thing , and then i met natalie , and i was exposed to the great cape breton fiddling .
that 's how we met .
you tell them .
nm : you want to or no ?
well i guess i have to now .
well , it 's just so interesting that donnell 's upbringing was very similar to mine , and i actually saw donnell play when i was about 12 years old , and he and his family came to inverness , which is about 45 minutes from where i lived , and i was just blown away , like , it was just amazing , and you 'll find out why pretty soon here , but i could n't believe the fiddling and mom was there with me , and she was saying -- donnell 's mother came up on stage and danced with her children , and mom was saying , " that 's julie macdonnell , i used to dance with her when we were kids . little did i think our children would be playing instruments , you know , playing music , yeah . "
twelve years , er , 20 years later little did she think her kids would be getting married , but anyway , so , then i got a phone call about , i dunno , seven years later . i was 19 , first or second year of college , and it was donnell , and he said " hi , you probably do n't know me but my name is donnell leahy . "
and i said , " i know you .
i have a tape of yours at home . "
and he said , " well , i 'm in truro , " which is where i was , and he asked me out for supper .
that 's it .
then -- will i keep going ?
then we dated for two years , broke up for 10 , got back together and got married .
dl : so anyway , we 're running out of time , so i 'll just get to it .
i 'm going to play a piece of music for you .
it 's actually a scottish piece i 've chosen .
i starts out with a slow air .
airs were played in europe at burials , as a body was carried out from the wake site to the burial site , the procession was led by a piper or a fiddle player .
i 'll quickly play a short part of the air , and then i 'm going to get into kind of a crazy tune that is very difficult to play when you 're not warmed up , so , if i mess it up , pretend you like it anyway . it 's called the banks .
nm : well , we 're gonna play one together now .
we 're laughing , like , because our styles are totally different , as you can hear .
and so , you know , donnell and i are actually in the process of writing new pieces of music together that we can play , but we do n't have any of those ready .
we just started yesterday .
so we 're gonna play something together anyway .
dl : with one minute .
nm : with one minute .
dl : you start . nm : no , you have to start , because you 've got to do your thing .
nm : i 'm not tuned . hold on .
nm : i feel like i 'm in the duck or the bird pose right now .
announcer : great news , they 're running late downstairs .
we 've got another 10 minutes .
nm : okay . sure .
all right , okay .
let 's get her going .
dl : what do you want to play ?
nm : well , um ...
nm : uh , sure .
dl : how fast ?
nm : not too fast .
dl : we 're going to play a tune and natalie 's going to accompany me on the piano .
the cape breton piano playing is just awesome . it 's very rhythmic and , you 'll see it .
my mom plays piano , and she learned to play before they had a piano at home in cape breton . before mom 's family had a piano in cape breton , she learned to play the rhythms on a piece of board , and the fiddlers would all congregate to play on the cold winter 's evenings and mom would be banging on this board , so when they bought a piano , they bought it in toronto and had it taken by train and brought in on a horse , a horse and sleigh to the house .
it became the only piano in the region , and mom said she could basically play as soon as the piano arrived , she could play it because she had learned all these rhythms . anyway , we found the piano last year and were able to bring it back home . we purchased it .
it had gone through , like , five or six families , and it was just a big thing for us , and we found actually an old picture of somebody and their family years ago .
anyway , i 'm blabbering on here .
nm : no , i want you to tell them about leahy .
dl : what about leahy ?
nm : just tell them what -- dl : she wants me to talk about -- we have a band named leahy .
there 's 11 siblings . we , um -- what will i tell them ?
we opened -- nm : no surgeries .
dl : no surgeries , oh yeah .
we had a great opportunity .
we opened for shania twain for two years on her international tour .
it was a big thing for us , and now all my sisters are off having babies and the boys are all getting married , so we 're staying close to home for , i guess , another couple of weeks .
what can i say ? i do n't know what to say , natalie . we , uh ...
nm : is this what marriage is about ?
i like it .
dl : oh yeah , okay , in my family we had seven girls , four boys , we had two fiddles and one piano , and of course we were all fighting to play on the instruments , so dad and mom set a rule that you could n't kick anyone off the instrument . you had to wait until they were finished , so of course , what we would do is we 'd get on the piano and you would n't even get off to eat , because you would n't want to give it up to your brother or sister , and they 'd wait and wait and wait , and it 'd be midnight and you 'd be still sitting there on the piano , but it was their way to get us to practice .
will we play a tune ?
nm : it worked . dl : it worked .
sorry , i hate to carry on ...
so this is our last number , and we 'll feature nat on piano .
okay , play in , how about a ?
