so , can we dare to be optimistic ?
well , the thesis of " the bottom billion " is that a billion people have been stuck living in economies that have been stagnant for 40 years , and hence diverging from the rest of mankind .
and so , the real question to pose is not , " can we be optimistic ? "
it 's , " how can we give credible hope to that billion people ? "
that , to my mind , is the fundamental challenge now of development .
what i 'm going to offer you is a recipe , a combination of the two forces that changed the world for good , which is the alliance of compassion and enlightened self - interest .
compassion , because a billion people are living in societies that have not offered credible hope .
that is a human tragedy .
enlightened self - interest , because if that economic divergence continues for another 40 years , combined with social integration globally , it will build a nightmare for our children .
we need compassion to get ourselves started , and enlightened self - interest to get ourselves serious .
that 's the alliance that changes the world .
so , what does it mean to get serious about providing hope for the bottom billion ?
what can we actually do ?
well , a good guide is to think , " what did we do last time the rich world got serious about developing another region of the world ? "
that gives us , it turns out , quite a good clue , except you have to go back quite a long time .
the last time the rich world got serious about developing another region was in the late 1940s .
the rich world was you , america , and the region that needed to be developed was my world , europe .
that was post - war europe .
why did america get serious ?
it was n't just compassion for europe , though there was that .
it was that you knew you had to , because , in the late 1940s , country after country in central europe was falling into the soviet bloc , and so you knew you 'd no choice .
europe had to be dragged into economic development .
so , what did you do , last time you got serious ?
well , yes , you had a big aid program . thank you very much .
that was marshall aid : we need to do it again . aid is part of the solution .
but what else did you do ?
well , you tore up your trade policy , and totally reversed it .
before the war , america had been highly protectionist .
after the war , you opened your markets to europe , you dragged europe into the then - global economy , which was your economy , and you institutionalized that trade liberalization through founding the general agreement on tariffs and trade .
so , total reversal of trade policy .
did you do anything else ?
yes , you totally reversed your security policy .
before the war , your security policy had been isolationist .
after the war , you tear that up , you put 100,000 troops in europe for over 40 years .
so , total reversal of security policy . anything else ?
yes , you tear up the " eleventh commandment " -- national sovereignty .
before the war , you treated national sovereignty as so sacrosanct that you were n't even willing to join the league of nations .
after the war , you found the united nations , you found the organization for economic cooperation and development , you found the imf , you encouraged europe to create the european community -- all systems for mutual government support .
that is still the waterfront of effective policies : aid , trade , security , governments .
of course , the details of policy are going to be different , because the challenge is different .
it 's not rebuilding europe , it 's reversing the divergence for the bottom billion , so that they actually catch up .
is that easier or harder ?
we need to be at least as serious as we were then .
now , today i 'm going to take just one of those four .
i 'm going to take the one that sounds the weakest , the one that 's just motherhood and apple pie -- governments , mutual systems of support for governments -- and i 'm going to show you one idea in how we could do something to strengthen governance , and i 'm going to show you that that is enormously important now .
the opportunity we 're going to look to is a genuine basis for optimism about the bottom billion , and that is the commodity booms .
the commodity booms are pumping unprecedented amounts of money into many , though not all , of the countries of the bottom billion .
partly , they 're pumping money in because commodity prices are high , but it 's not just that . there 's also a range of new discoveries .
uganda has just discovered oil , in about the most disastrous location on earth ; ghana has discovered oil ; guinea has got a huge new exploitation of iron ore coming out of the ground .
so , a mass of new discoveries .
between them , these new revenue flows dwarf aid .
just to give you one example : angola alone is getting 50 billion dollars a year in oil revenue .
the entire aid flows to the 60 countries of the bottom billion last year were 34 billion .
so , the flow of resources from the commodity booms to the bottom billion are without precedent .
so there 's the optimism .
the question is , how is it going to help their development ?
it 's a huge opportunity for transformational development .
will it be taken ?
so , here comes a bit of science , and this is a bit of science i 've done since " the bottom billion , " so it 's new .
i 've looked to see what is the relationship between higher commodity prices of exports , and the growth of commodity - exporting countries .
and i 've looked globally , i 've taken all the countries in the world for the last 40 years , and looked to see what the relationship is .
and the short run -- say , the first five to seven years -- is just great .
in fact , it 's hunky dory : everything goes up .
you get more money because your terms of trade have improved , but also that drives up output across the board .
so gdp goes up a lot -- fantastic ! that 's the short run .
and how about the long run ?
come back 15 years later .
well , the short run , it 's hunky dory , but the long run , it 's humpty dumpty .
you go up in the short run , but then most societies historically have ended up worse than if they 'd had no booms at all .
that is not a forecast about how commodity prices go ; it 's a forecast of the consequences , the long - term consequences , for growth of an increase in prices .
so , what goes wrong ? why is there this " resource curse , " as it 's called ?
and again , i 've looked at that , and it turns out that the critical issue is the level of governance , the initial level of economic governance , when the resource booms accrue .
in fact , if you 've got good enough governance , there is no resource boom .
you go up in the short term , and then you go up even more in the long term .
that 's norway , the richest country in europe . it 's australia . it 's canada .
the resource curse is entirely confined to countries below a threshold of governance .
they still go up in the short run .
that 's what we 're seeing across the bottom billion at the moment .
the best growth rates they 've had -- ever .
and the question is whether the short run will persist .
and with bad governance historically , over the last 40 years , it has n't .
it 's countries like nigeria , which are worse off than if they 'd never had oil .
so , there 's a threshold level above which you go up in the long term , and below which you go down .
just to benchmark that threshold , it 's about the governance level of portugal in the mid 1980s .
so , the question is , are the bottom billion above or below that threshold ?
now , there 's one big change since the commodity booms of the 1970s , and that is the spread of democracy .
so i thought , well , maybe that is the thing which has transformed governance in the bottom billion .
maybe we can be more optimistic because of the spread of democracy .
so , i looked . democracy does have significant effects -- and unfortunately , they 're adverse .
democracies make even more of a mess of these resource booms than autocracies .
at that stage i just wanted to abandon the research , but -- -- it turns out that democracy is a little bit more complicated than that .
because there are two distinct aspects of democracy : there 's electoral competition , which determines how you acquire power , and there are checks and balances , which determine how you use power .
it turns out that electoral competition is the thing that 's doing the damage with democracy , whereas strong checks and balances make resource booms good .
and so , what the countries of the bottom billion need is very strong checks and balances .
they have n't got them .
they got instant democracy in the 1990s : elections without checks and balances .
how can we help improve governance and introduce checks and balances ?
in all the societies of the bottom billion , there are intense struggles to do just that .
the simple proposal is that we should have some international standards , which will be voluntary , but which would spell out the key decision points that need to be taken in order to harness these resource revenues .
we know these international standards work because we 've already got one .
it 's called the extractive industries transparency initiative .
that is the very simple idea that governments should report to their citizens what revenues they have .
no sooner was it proposed than reformers in nigeria adopted it , pushed it and published the revenues in the paper .
nigerian newspapers circulations spiked .
people wanted to know what their government was getting in terms of revenue .
so , we know it works . what would the content be of these international standards ?
i ca n't go through all of them , but i 'll give you an example .
the first is how to take the resources out of the ground -- the economic processes , taking the resources out of the ground and putting assets on top of the ground .
and the first step in that is selling the rights to resource extraction .
you know how rights to resource extraction are being sold at the moment , how they 've been sold over the last 40 years ?
a company flies in , does a deal with a minister .
and that 's great for the company , and it 's quite often great for the minister -- -- and it 's not great for their country .
there 's a very simple institutional technology which can transform that , and it 's called verified auctions .
the public agency with the greatest expertise on earth is of course the treasury -- that is , the british treasury .
and the british treasury decided that it would sell the rights to third - generation mobile phones by working out what those rights were worth .
they worked out they were worth two billion pounds .
just in time , a set of economists got there and said , " why not try an auction ? it 'll reveal the value . "
it went for 20 billion pounds through auction .
if the british treasury can be out by a factor of 10 , think what the ministry of finance in sierra leone is going to be like .
when i put that to the president of sierra leone , the next day he asked the world bank to send him a team to give expertise on how to conduct auctions .
there are five such decision points ; each one needs an international standard .
if we could do it , we would change the world .
we would be helping the reformers in these societies , who are struggling for change .
that 's our modest role . we cannot change these societies , but we can help the people in these societies who are struggling and usually failing , because the odds are so stacked against them .
and yet , we 've not got these rules .
if you think about it , the cost of promulgating international rules is zilch -- nothing .
why on earth are they not there ?
i realized that the reason they 're not there is that until we have a critical mass of informed citizens in our own societies , politicians will get away with gestures .
that unless we have an informed society , what politicians do , especially in relation to africa , is gestures : things that look good , but do n't work .
and so i realized we had to go through the business of building an informed citizenry .
that 's why i broke all the professional rules of conduct for an economist , and i wrote an economics book that you could read on a beach .
however , i have to say , the process of communication does not come naturally to me .
this is why i 'm on this stage , but it 's alarming .
i grew up in a culture of self - effacement .
my wife showed me a blog comment on one of my last talks , and the blog comment said , " collier is not charismatic -- -- but his arguments are compelling . "
if you agree with that sentiment , and if you agree that we need a critical mass of informed citizenry , you will realize that i need you .
please , become ambassadors .
thank you .
