so the first question is , why do we need to even worry about a pandemic threat ?
what is it that we 're concerned about ?
when i say " we , " i 'm at the council on foreign relations .
we 're concerned in the national security community , and of course in the biology community and the public health community .
while globalization has increased travel , it 's made it necessary that everybody be everywhere , all the time , all over the world .
and that means that your microbial hitchhikers are moving with you .
so a plague outbreak in surat , india becomes not an obscure event , but a globalized event -- a globalized concern that has changed the risk equation .
katrina showed us that we cannot completely depend on government to have readiness in hand , to be capable of handling things .
indeed , an outbreak would be multiple katrinas at once .
our big concern at the moment is a virus called h 5n1 flu -- some of you call it bird flu -- which first emerged in southern china , in the mid - 1990s , but we did n't know about it until 1997 .
at the end of last christmas only 13 countries had seen h 5n1 .
but we 're now up to 55 countries in the world , have had this virus emerge , in either birds , or people or both .
in the bird outbreaks we now can see that pretty much the whole world has seen this virus except the americas .
and i 'll get into why we 've so far been spared in a moment .
in domestic birds , especially chickens , it 's 100 percent lethal .
it 's one of the most lethal things we 've seen in circulation in the world in any recent centuries .
and we 've dealt with it by killing off lots and lots and lots of chickens , and unfortunately often not reimbursing the peasant farmers with the result that there 's cover - up .
it 's also carried on migration patterns of wild migratory aquatic birds .
there has been this centralized event in a place called lake chenghai , china .
two years ago the migrating birds had a multiple event where thousands died because of a mutation occurring in the virus , which made the species range broaden dramatically .
so that birds going to siberia , to europe , and to africa carried the virus , which had not previously been possible .
we 're now seeing outbreaks in human populations -- so far , fortunately , small events , tiny outbreaks , occasional clusters .
the virus has mutated dramatically in the last two years to form two distinct families , if you will , of the h 5n1 viral tree with branches in them , and with different attributes that are worrying .
so what 's concerning us ? well , first of all , at no time in history have we succeeded in making in a timely fashion , a specific vaccine for more than 260 million people .
it 's not going to do us very much good in a global pandemic .
you 've heard about the vaccine we 're stockpiling .
but nobody believes it will actually be particularly effective if we have a real outbreak .
after 9/11 , when the airports closed , our flu season was delayed by two weeks .
so the thought is , hey , maybe what we should do is just immediately -- we hear there is h 5n1 spreading from human to human , the virus has mutated to be a human - to - human transmitter -- let 's shut down the airports .
however , huge supercomputer analyses , done of the likely effectiveness of this , show that it wo n't buy us much time at all .
and of course it will be hugely disruptive in preparation plans .
for example , all masks are made in china .
how do you get them mobilized around the world if you 've shut all the airports down ?
how do you get the vaccines moved around the world and the drugs moved , and whatever may or not be available that would work .
so it turns out that shutting down the airports is counterproductive .
we 're worried because this virus , unlike any other flu we 've ever studied , can be transmitted by eating raw meat of the infected animals .
we 've seen transmission to wild cats and domestic cats , and now also domestic pet dogs .
and in experimental feedings to rodents and ferrets , we found that the animals exhibit symptoms never seen with flu : seizures , central nervous system disorders , partial paralysis .
this is not your normal garden - variety flu .
it mimics what we now understand about reconstructing the 1918 flu virus , the last great pandemic , in that it also jumped directly from birds to people .
we had evolution over time , and this unbelievable mortality rate in human beings : 55 percent of people who have become infected with h 5n1 have , in fact , succumbed .
and we do n't have a huge number of people who got infected and never developed disease .
in experimental feeding in monkeys you can see that it actually downregulates a specific immune system modulator .
the result is that what kills you is not the virus directly , but your own immune system overreacting , saying , " whatever this is so foreign i 'm going berserk . "
the result : most of the deaths have been in people under 30 years of age , robustly healthy young adults .
we have seen human - to - human transmission in at least three clusters -- fortunately involving very intimate contact , still not putting the world at large at any kind of risk .
alright , so i 've got you nervous .
now you probably assume , well the governments are going to do something .
and we have spent a lot of money .
most of the spending in the bush administration has actually been more related to the anthrax results and bio - terrorism threat .
but a lot of money has been thrown out at the local level and at the federal level to look at infectious diseases .
end result : only 15 states have been certified to be able to do mass distribution of vaccine and drugs in a pandemic .
half the states would run out of hospital beds in the first week , maybe two weeks .
and 40 states already have an acute nursing shortage .
add on pandemic threat , you 're in big trouble .
so what have people been doing with this money ?
exercises , drills , all over the world .
let 's pretend there 's a pandemic .
let 's everybody run around and play your role .
main result is that there is tremendous confusion .
most of these people do n't actually know what their job will be .
and the bottom line , major thing that has come through in every single drill : nobody knows who 's in charge .
nobody knows the chain of command .
if it were los angeles , is it the mayor , the governor , the president of the united states , the head of homeland security ?
in fact , the federal government says it 's a guy called the principle federal officer , who happens to be with tsa .
the government says the federal responsibility will basically be about trying to keep the virus out , which we all know is impossible , and then to mitigate the impact primarily on our economy .
the rest is up to your local community .
everything is about your town , where you live .
well how good a city council you have , how good a mayor you have -- that 's who 's going to be in charge .
most local facilities would all be competing to try and get their hands on their piece of the federal stockpile of a drug called tamiflu , which may or may not be helpful -- i 'll get into that -- of available vaccines , and any other treatments , and masks , and anything that 's been stockpiled .
and you 'll have massive competition .
now we did purchase a vaccine , you 've probably all heard about it , made by sanofi - aventis .
unfortunately it 's made against the current form of h 5n1 .
we know the virus will mutate . it will be a different virus .
the vaccine will probably be useless .
so here 's where the decisions come in .
you 're the mayor of your local town .
let 's see , should we order that all pets be kept indoors ?
germany did that when h 5n1 appeared in germany last year , in order to minimize the spread between households by household cats , dogs and so on .
what do we do when we do n't have any containment rooms with reverse air that will allow the healthcare workers to take care of patients ?
these are in hong kong ; we have nothing like that here .
what about quarantine ?
during the sars epidemic in beijing quarantine did seem to help .
we have no uniform policies regarding quarantine across the united states .
and some states have differential policies , county by county .
but what about the no - brainer things ? should we close all the schools ?
well then what about all the workers ? they wo n't go to work if their kids are n't in school .
encouraging telecommuting ? what works ?
well the british government did a model of telecommuting .
six weeks they had all people in the banking industry pretend a pandemic was underway .
what they found was , the core functions -- you know you still sort of had banks , but you could n't get people to put money in the atm machines .
nobody was processing the credit cards .
your insurance payments did n't go through .
and basically the economy would be in a disaster state of affairs .
and that 's just office workers , bankers .
we do n't know how important hand washing is for flu -- shocking . one assumes it 's a good idea to wash your hands a lot .
but actually in scientific community there is great debate about what percentage of flu transmission between people is from sneezing and coughing and what percentage is on your hands .
the institute of medicine tried to look at the masking question .
can we figure out a way , since we know we wo n't have enough masks because we do n't make them in america anymore , they 're all made in china -- do we need n 95 ? a state - of - the - art , top - of - the - line , must - be - fitted - to - your - face mask ?
or can we get away with some different kinds of masks ?
in the sars epidemic , we learned in hong kong that most of transmission was because people were removing their masks improperly .
and their hand got contaminated with the outside of the mask , and then they rubbed their nose . bingo ! they got sars .
it was n't flying microbes .
if you go online right now , you 'll get so much phony - baloney information .
you 'll end up buying -- this is called an n 95 mask . ridiculous .
we do n't actually have a standard for what should be the protective gear for the first responders , the people who will actually be there on the front lines .
and tamiflu . you 've probably heard of this drug , made by hoffmann - la roche , patented drug .
there is some indication that it may buy you some time in the midst of an outbreak .
should you take tamiflu for a long period of time , well , one of the side effects is suicidal ideations .
a public health survey analyzed the effect that large - scale tamiflu use would have , actually shows it counteractive to public health measures , making matters worse .
and here is the other interesting thing : when a human being ingests tamiflu , only 20 percent is metabolized appropriately to be an active compound in the human being .
the rest turns into a stable compound , which survives filtration into the water systems , thereby exposing the very aquatic birds that would carry flu and providing them a chance to breed resistant strains .
and we now have seen tamiflu - resistant strains in both vietnam in person - to - person transmission , and in egypt in person - to - person transmission .
so i personally think that our life expectancy for tamiflu as an effective drug is very limited -- very limited indeed .
nevertheless most of the governments have based their whole flu policies on building stockpiles of tamiflu .
russia has actually stockpiled enough for 95 percent of all russians .
we 've stockpiled enough for 30 percent .
when i say enough , that 's two weeks worth .
and then you 're on your own because the pandemic is going to last for 18 to 24 months .
some of the poorer countries that have had the most experience with h 5n1 have built up stockpiles ; they 're already expired . they are already out of date .
what do we know from 1918 , the last great pandemic ?
the federal government abdicated most responsibility .
and so we ended up with this wild patchwork of regulations all over america .
every city , county , state did their own thing .
and the rules and the belief systems were wildly disparate .
in some cases all schools , all churches , all public venues were closed .
the pandemic circulated three times in 18 months in the absence of commercial air travel .
the second wave was the mutated , super - killer wave .
and in the first wave we had enough healthcare workers .
but by the time the second wave hit it took such a toll among the healthcare workers that we lost most of our doctors and nurses that were on the front lines .
overall we lost 700,000 people .
the virus was 100 percent lethal to pregnant women and we do n't actually know why .
most of the death toll was 15 to 40 year - olds -- robustly healthy young adults .
it was likened to the plague .
we do n't actually know how many people died .
the low - ball estimate is 35 million .
this was based on european and north american data .
a new study by chris murray at harvard shows that if you look at the databases that were kept by the brits in india , there was a 31 - fold greater death rate among the indians .
so there is a strong belief that in places of poverty the death toll was far higher .
and that a more likely toll is somewhere in the neighborhood of 80 to 100 million people before we had commercial air travel .
so are we ready ?
as a nation , no we 're not .
and i think even those in the leadership would say that is the case , that we still have a long ways to go .
so what does that mean for you ? well the first thing is , i would n't start building up personal stockpiles of anything -- for yourself , your family , or your employees -- unless you 've really done your homework .
what mask works , what mask does n't work .
how many masks do you need ?
the institute of medicine study felt that you could not recycle masks .
well if you think it 's going to last 18 months , are you going to buy 18 months worth of masks for every single person in your family ?
we do n't know -- again with tamiflu , the number one side effect of tamiflu is flu - like symptoms .
so then how can you tell who in your family has the flu if everybody is taking tamiflu ?
if you expand that out to think of a whole community , or all your employees in your company , you begin to realize how limited the tamiflu option might be .
everybody has come up to me and said , well i 'll stockpile water or , i 'll stockpile food , or what have you .
but really ? do you really have a place to stockpile 18 months worth of food ? twenty - four months worth of food ?
do you want to view the pandemic threat the way back in the 1950s people viewed the civil defense issue , and build your own little bomb shelter for pandemic flu ?
i do n't think that 's rational .
i think it 's about having to be prepared as communities , not as individuals -- being prepared as nation , being prepared as state , being prepared as town .
and right now most of the preparedness is deeply flawed .
and i hope i 've convinced you of that , which means that the real job is go out and say to your local leaders , and your national leaders , " why have n't you solved these problems ?
why are you still thinking that the lessons of katrina do not apply to flu ? "
and put the pressure where the pressure needs to be put .
but i guess the other thing to add is , if you do have employees , and you do have a company , i think you have certain responsibilities to demonstrate that you are thinking ahead for them , and you are trying to plan .
at a minimum the british banking plan showed that telecommuting can be helpful .
it probably does reduce exposure because people are not coming into the office and coughing on each other , or touching common objects and sharing things via their hands .
but can you sustain your company that way ?
well if you have a dot - com , maybe you can .
otherwise you 're in trouble .
happy to take your questions .
audience member : what factors determine the duration of a pandemic ?
laurie garret : what factors determine the duration of a pandemic , we do n't really know .
i could give you a bunch of flip , this , that , and the other .
but i would say that honestly we do n't know .
clearly the bottom line is the virus eventually attenuates , and ceases to be a lethal virus to humanity , and finds other hosts .
but we do n't really know how and why that happens .
it 's a very complicated ecology .
audience member : what kind of triggers are you looking for ?
you know way more than any of us .
to say ahh , if this happens then we are going to have a pandemic ?
lg : the moment that you see any evidence of serious human - to - human to transmission .
not just intimately between family members who took care of an ailing sister or brother , but a community infected -- spread within a school , spread within a dormitory , something of that nature .
then i think that there is universal agreement now , at who all the way down : send out the alert .
audience member : some research has indicated that statins can be helpful .
can you talk about that ?
lg : yeah . there is some evidence that taking lipitor and other common statins for cholesterol control may decrease your vulnerability to influenza .
but we do not completely understand why .
the mechanism is n't clear .
and i do n't know that there is any way responsibly for someone to start medicating their children with their personal supply of lipitor or something of that nature .
we have absolutely no idea what that would do .
you might be causing some very dangerous outcomes in your children , doing such a thing .
audience member : how far along are we in being able to determine whether someone is actually carrying , whether somebody has this before the symptoms are full - blown ?
lg : right . so i have for a long time said that what we really needed was a rapid diagnostic .
and our centers for disease control has labeled a test they developed a rapid diagnostic .
it takes 24 hours in a very highly developed laboratory , i 'm thinking dipstick .
you could do it to your own kid . it changes color .
it tells you if you have h 5n1 .
in terms of where we are in science with dna identification capacities and so on , it 's not that far off .
but we 're not there . and there has n't been the kind of investment to get us there .
audience member : in the 1918 flu i understand that they theorized that there was some attenuation of the virus when it made the leap into humans .
is that likely , do you think , here ?
i mean 100 percent death rate is pretty severe .
lg : um yeah . so we do n't actually know what the lethality was of the 1918 strain to wild birds before it jumped from birds to humans .
it 's curious that there is no evidence of mass die - offs of chickens or household birds across america before the human pandemic happened .
that may be because those events were occurring on the other side of the world where nobody was paying attention .
but the virus clearly went through one round around the world in a mild enough form that the british army in world war i actually certified that it was not a threat and would not affect the outcome of the war .
and after circulating around the world came back in a form that was tremendously lethal .
what percentage of infected people were killed by it ?
again we do n't really know for sure .
it 's clear that if you were malnourished to begin with , you had a weakened immune system , you lived in poverty in india or africa , your likelihood of dying was far greater .
but we do n't really know .
audience member : one of the things i 've heard is that the real death cause when you get a flu is the associated pneumonia , and that a pneumonia vaccine may offer you 50 percent better chance of survival .
lg : for a long time , researchers in emerging diseases were kind of dismissive of the pandemic flu threat on the grounds that back in 1918 they did n't have antibiotics .
and that most people who die of regular flu -- which in regular flu years is about 360,000 people worldwide , most of them senior citizens -- and they die not of the flu but because the flu gives an assault to their immune system .
and along comes pneumococcus or another bacteria , streptococcus and boom , they get a bacterial pneumonia .
but it turns out that in 1918 that was not the case at all .
and so far in the h 5n1 cases in people , similarly bacterial infection has not been an issue at all .
it 's this absolutely phenomenal disruption of the immune system that is the key to why people die of this virus .
and i would just add we saw the same thing with sars .
so what 's going on here is your body says , your immune system sends out all its sentinels and says , " i do n't know what the heck this is .
we 've never seen anything even remotely like this before . "
it wo n't do any good to bring in the sharpshooters because those antibodies are n't here .
and it wo n't do any good to bring in the tanks and the artillery because those t - cells do n't recognize it either .
so we 're going to have to go all - out thermonuclear response , stimulate the total cytokine cascade .
the whole immune system swarms into the lungs .
and yes they die , drowning in their own fluids , of pneumonia .
but it 's not bacterial pneumonia .
and it 's not a pneumonia that would respond to a vaccine .
and i think my time is up . i thank you all for your attention .
