i have a daughter , mulan .
and when she was eight , last year , she was doing a report for school or she had some homework about frogs .
and we were at this restaurant , and she said , " so , basically , frogs lay eggs and the eggs turn into tadpoles , and tadpoles turn into frogs . "
and i said , " yeah . you know , i 'm not really up on my frog reproduction that much .
it 's the females , i think , that lay the eggs , and then the males fertilize them .
and then they become tadpoles and frogs . "
and she says , " what ? only the females have eggs ? "
and i said , " yeah . "
and she goes , " and what 's this fertilizing ? "
so i kind of said , " oh , it 's this extra ingredient , you know , that you need to create a new frog from the mom and dad frog . "
and she said , " oh , so is that true for humans too ? "
and i thought , " okay , here we go . "
i did n't know it would happen so quick , at eight .
i was trying to remember all the guidebooks , and all i could remember was , " only answer the question they 're asking .
do n't give any more information . "
so i said , " yes . "
and she said , " and where do , um , where do human women , like , where do women lay their eggs ? "
and i said , " well , funny you should ask .
we have evolved to have our own pond .
we have our very own pond inside our bodies .
and we lay our eggs there , we do n't have to worry about other eggs or anything like that .
it 's our own pond . and that 's how it happens . "
and she goes , " then how do they get fertilized ? "
and i said , " well , men , through their penis , they fertilize the eggs by the sperm coming out .
and you go through the woman 's vagina . "
and so we 're just eating , and her jaw just drops , and she goes , " mom !
like , where you go to the bathroom ? "
and i said , " i know .
i know . "
that 's how we evolved . it does seem odd .
it is a little bit like having a waste treatment plant right next to an amusement park ...
bad zoning , but . . . "
she 's like , " what ? " and she goes , " but mom , but men and women ca n't ever see each other naked , mom .
so how could that ever happen ? "
and then i go , " well , " and then i put my margaret mead hat on .
" human males and females develop a special bond , and when they 're much older , much , much older than you , and they have a very special feeling , then they can be naked together . "
and she said , " mom , have you done this before ? "
and i said , " yes . "
and she said , " but mom , you ca n't have kids . "
because she knows that i adopted her and that i ca n't have kids .
and i said , " yes . "
and she said , " well , you do n't have to do that again . "
and i said , " . . . "
and then she said , " but how does it happen when a man and woman are together ?
like , how do they know that 's the time ?
mom , does the man just say , ' is now the time to take off my pants ? ' " and i said , " yes . "
" that is exactly right .
that 's exactly how it happens . "
so we 're driving home and she 's looking out the window , and she goes , " mom . what if two just people saw each other on the street , like a man and a woman , they just started doing it . would that ever happen ? "
and i said , " oh , no. humans are so private .
oh . . . "
and then she goes , " what if there was like a party , and there was just like a whole bunch of girls and a whole bunch of boys , and there was a bunch of men and women and they just started doing it , mom ?
would that ever happen ? "
and i said , " oh , no , no.
that 's not how we do it . "
then we got home and we see the cat . and she goes , " mom , how do cats do it ? "
and i go , " oh , it 's the same . it 's basically the same . "
and then she got all caught up in the legs . " but how would the legs go , mom ?
i do n't understand the legs . "
she goes , " mom , everyone ca n't do the splits . "
and i go , " i know , but the legs . . . "
and i 'm probably like , " the legs get worked out . "
and she goes , " but i just ca n't understand it . "
so i go , " you know , why do n't we go on the internet , and maybe we can see ... like on wikipedia . "
so we go online , and we put in " cats mating . "
and , unfortunately , on youtube , there 's many cats mating videos .
and we watched them and i 'm so thankful , because she 's just like , " wow ! this is so amazing . "
she goes , " what about dogs ? "
so we put in dogs mating , and , you know , we 're watching it , and she 's totally absorbed .
and then she goes , " mom , do you think they would have , on the internet , any humans mating ? "
and then i realized that i had taken my little eight year old 's hand , and taken her right into internet porn .
and i looked into this trusting , loving face , and i said , " oh , no.
that would never happen . "
thank you .
thank you .
thank you . i 'm so happy to be here .
