i 'm here today to show my photographs of the lakota .
many of you may have heard of the lakota , or at least the larger group of tribes called the sioux .
the lakota are one of many tribes that were moved off their land to prisoner of war camps now called reservations .
the pine ridge reservation , the subject of today 's slide show , is located about 75 miles southeast of the black hills in south dakota .
it is sometimes referred to as prisoner of war camp number 334 , and it is where the lakota now live .
now , if any of you have ever heard of aim , the american indian movement , or of russell means , or leonard peltier , or of the stand - off at oglala , then you know that pine ridge is ground zero for native issues in the u.s.
so i 've been asked to talk a little bit today about my relationship with the lakota , and that 's a very difficult one for me .
because , if you have n't noticed from my skin color , i 'm white , and that is a huge barrier on a native reservation .
you 'll see a lot of people in my photographs today , and i 've become very close with them , and they 've welcomed me like family .
they 've called me " brother " and " uncle " and invited me again and again over five years .
but on pine ridge , i will always be what is called " wasichu , " and " wasichu " is a lakota word that means " non - indian , " but another version of this word means " the one who takes the best meat for himself . "
and that 's what i want to focus on -- the one who takes the best part of the meat .
it means greedy .
so take a look around this auditorium today .
we are at a private school in the american west , sitting in red velvet chairs with money in our pockets .
and if we look at our lives , we have indeed taken the best part of the meat . so let 's look today at a set of photographs of a people who lost so that we could gain , and know that when you see these people 's faces that these are not just images of the lakota ; they stand for all indigenous people .
on this piece of paper is the history the way i learned it from my lakota friends and family .
the following is a time - line of treaties made , treaties broken and massacres disguised as battles .
i 'll begin in 1824 .
what is known as the bureau of indian affairs was created within the war department , setting an early tone of aggression in our dealings with the native americans .
1851 : the first treaty of fort laramie was made , clearly marking the boundaries of the lakota nation .
according to the treaty , those lands are a sovereign nation .
if the boundaries of this treaty had held -- and there is a legal basis that they should -- then this is what the u.s. would look like today .
10 years later , the homestead act , signed by president lincoln , unleashed a flood of white settlers into native lands .
1863 : an uprising of santee sioux in minnesota ends with the hanging of 38 sioux men , the largest mass execution in u.s. history .
the execution was ordered by president lincoln only two days after he signed the emancipation proclamation .
1866 : the beginning of the transcontinental railroad -- a new era .
we appropriated land for trails and trains to shortcut through the heart of the lakota nation .
the treaties were out the window .
in response , three tribes led by the lakota chief red cloud attacked and defeated the u.s. army many times over .
i want to repeat that part .
the lakota defeat the u.s. army .
1868 : the second fort laramie treaty clearly guarantees the sovereignty of the great sioux nation and the lakotas ' ownership of the sacred black hills .
the government also promises land and hunting rights in the surrounding states .
we promise that the powder river country will henceforth be closed to all whites .
the treaty seemed to be a complete victory for red cloud and the sioux .
in fact , this is the only war in american history in which the government negotiated a peace by conceding everything demanded by the enemy .
1869 : the transcontinental railroad was completed .
it began carrying , among other things , a large number of hunters who began the wholesale killing of buffalo , eliminating a source of food and clothing and shelter for the sioux .
1871 : the indian appropriation act makes all indians wards of the federal government .
in addition , the military issued orders forbidding western indians from leaving reservations .
all western indians at that point in time were now prisoners of war .
also in 1871 , we ended the time of treaty - making .
the problem with treaties is they allow tribes to exist as sovereign nations , and we ca n't have that . we had plans .
1874 : general george custer announced the discovery of gold in lakota territory , specifically the black hills .
the news of gold creates a massive influx of white settlers into lakota nation .
custer recommends that congress find a way to end the treaties with the lakota as soon as possible .
1875 : the lakota war begins over the violation of the fort laramie treaty .
1876 : on july 26th on its way to attack a lakota village , custer 's 7th cavalry was crushed at the battle of little big horn .
1877 : the great lakota warrior and chief named crazy horse surrendered at fort robinson .
he was later killed while in custody .
1877 is also the year we found a way to get around the fort laramie treaties .
a new agreement was presented to sioux chiefs and their leading men under a campaign known as " sell or starve : "
sign the paper , or no food for your tribe .
only 10 percent of the adult male population signed .
the fort laramie treaty called for at least three - quarters of the tribe to sign away land .
that clause was obviously ignored .
1887 : the dawes act . communal ownership of reservation lands ends .
reservations are cut up into 160 - acre sections and distributed to individual indians with the surplus disposed of .
tribes lost millions of acres .
the american dream of individual land ownership turned out to be a very clever way to divide the reservation until nothing was left .
the move destroyed the reservations , making it easier to further subdivide and to sell with every passing generation .
most of the surplus land and many of the plots within reservation boundaries are now in the hands of white ranchers .
once again , the fat of the land goes to wasichu .
1890 , a date i believe to be the most important in this slide show .
this is the year of the wounded knee massacre .
on december 29th , u.s. troops surrounded a sioux encampment at wounded knee creek and massacred chief big foot and 300 prisoners of war , using a new rapid - fire weapon that fired exploding shells called a hotchkiss gun .
for this so - called " battle , " 20 congressional medals of honor for valor were given to the 7th cavalry .
to this day , this is the most medals of honor ever awarded for a single battle .
more medals of honor were given for the indiscriminate slaughter of women and children than for any battle in world war one , world war two , korea , vietnam , iraq or afghanistan .
the wounded knee massacre is considered the end of the indian wars .
whenever i visit the site of the mass grave at wounded knee , i see it not just as a grave for the lakota or for the sioux , but as a grave for all indigenous peoples .
the holy man , black elk , said , " i did not know then how much was ended .
when i look back now from this high hill of my old age , i can still see the butchered women and children lying heaped and scattered all along the crooked gulch as plain as when i saw them with eyes still young .
and i can see that something else died there in the bloody mud and was buried in the blizzard :
a people 's dream died there , and it was a beautiful dream . "
with this event , a new era in native american history began .
everything can be measured before wounded knee and after .
because it was in this moment with the fingers on the triggers of the hotchkiss guns that the u.s. government openly declared its position on native rights .
they were tired of treaties .
they were tired of sacred hills .
they were tired of ghost dances .
and they were tired of all the inconveniences of the sioux .
so they brought out their cannons .
" you want to be an indian now ? " they said , finger on the trigger .
1900 : the u.s. indian population reached its low point -- less than 250,000 , compared to an estimated eight million in 1492 .
fast - forward .
1980 : the longest running court case in u.s. history , the sioux nation v. the united states , was ruled upon by the u.s. supreme court .
the court determined that , when the sioux were resettled onto reservations and seven million acres of their land were opened up to prospectors and homesteaders , the terms of the second fort laramie treaty had been violated .
the court stated that the black hills were illegally taken and that the initial offering price plus interest should be paid to the sioux nation .
as payment for the black hills , the court awarded only 106 million dollars to the sioux nation .
the sioux refused the money with the rallying cry , " the black hills are not for sale . "
2010 : statistics about native population today , more than a century after the massacre at wounded knee , reveal the legacy of colonization , forced migration and treaty violations .
unemployment on the pine ridge indian reservation fluctuates between 85 and 90 percent .
the housing office is unable to build new structures , and existing structures are falling apart .
many are homeless , and those with homes are packed into rotting buildings with up to five families .
39 percent of homes on pine ridge have no electricity .
at least 60 percent of the homes on the reservation are infested with black mold .
more than 90 percent of the population lives below the federal poverty line .
the tuberculosis rate on pine ridge is approximately eight times higher than the u.s. national average .
the infant mortality rate is the highest on this continent and is about three times higher than the u.s. national average .
cervical cancer is five times higher than the u.s. national average .
school dropout rate is up to 70 percent .
teacher turnover is eight times higher than the u.s. national average .
frequently , grandparents are raising their grandchildren because parents , due to alcoholism , domestic violence and general apathy , cannot raise them .
50 percent of the population over the age of 40 suffers from diabetes .
the life expectancy for men is between 46 and 48 years old -- roughly the same as in afghanistan and somalia .
the last chapter in any successful genocide is the one in which the oppressor can remove their hands and say , " my god , what are these people doing to themselves ?
they 're killing each other .
they 're killing themselves while we watch them die . "
this is how we came to own these united states .
this is the legacy of manifest destiny .
prisoners are still born into prisoner - of - war camps long after the guards are gone .
these are the bones left after the best meat has been taken .
a long time ago , a series of events was set in motion by a people who look like me , by wasichu , eager to take the land and the water and the gold in the hills .
those events led to a domino effect that has yet to end .
as removed as we the dominant society may feel from a massacre in 1890 , or a series of broken treaties 150 years ago , i still have to ask you the question , how should you feel about the statistics of today ?
what is the connection between these images of suffering and the history that i just read to you ?
and how much of this history do you need to own , even ?
is any of this your responsibility today ?
i have been told that there must be something we can do .
there must be some call to action .
because for so long i 've been standing on the sidelines content to be a witness , just taking photographs .
because the solution seems so far in the past , i needed nothing short of a time machine to access them .
the suffering of indigenous peoples is not a simple issue to fix .
it 's not something everyone can get behind the way they get behind helping haiti , or ending aids , or fighting a famine .
the " fix , " as it 's called , may be much more difficult for the dominant society than , say , a $ 50 check or a church trip to paint some graffiti - covered houses , or a suburban family donating a box of clothes they do n't even want anymore .
so where does that leave us ?
shrugging our shoulders in the dark ?
the united states continues on a daily basis to violate the terms of the 1851 and 1868 fort laramie treaties with the lakota .
the call to action i offer today -- my ted wish -- is this : honor the treaties .
give back the black hills .
it 's not your business what they do with them .
