the khan academy is most known for its collection of videos , so before i go any further , let me show you a little bit of a montage .
salman khan : so the hypotenuse is now going to be five .
this animal 's fossils are only found in this area of south america -- a nice clean band here -- and this part of africa .
we can integrate over the surface , and the notation usually is a capital sigma .
national assembly : they create the committee of public safety , which sounds like a very nice committee .
notice , this is an aldehyde , and it 's an alcohol .
start differentiating into effector and memory cells .
a galaxy . hey , there 's another galaxy .
oh look , there 's another galaxy .
and for dollars , is their 30 million , plus the 20 million dollars from the american manufacturer .
if this does not blow your mind , then you have no emotion .
sk : we now have on the order of 2,200 videos covering everything from basic arithmetic all the way to vector calculus and some of the stuff you saw there .
we have a million students a month using the site , watching on the order of 100 to 200,000 videos a day .
but what we 're going to talk about in this is how we 're going to the next level .
but before i do that , i want to talk a little bit about really just how i got started .
and some of you all might know , about five years ago i was an analyst at a hedge fund ,
and i was in boston , and i was tutoring my cousins in new orleans , remotely .
and i started putting the first youtube videos up just a supplement for my cousins -- something that might give them a refresher or something .
and as soon as i put those first youtube videos up , something interesting happened -- actually a bunch of interesting things happened .
the first was the feedback from my cousins .
they told me that they preferred me on youtube than in person .
and once you get over the backhanded nature of that , there was actually something very profound there .
they were saying that they preferred the automated version of their cousin to their cousin .
at first , it 's very unintuitive , but when you actually think about it from their point of view , it makes a ton of sense .
you have this situation where now they can pause and repeat their cousin , without feeling like they 're wasting my time .
if they have to review something that they should have learned a couple of weeks ago , or maybe a couple of years ago , they do n't have to be embarrassed and ask their cousin .
they can just watch those videos . if they 're bored , they can go ahead .
they can watch it at their own time , at their own pace .
and probably the least appreciated aspect of this is the notion that the very first time , the very first time that you 're trying to get your brain around a new concept , the very last thing you need is another human being saying , " do you understand this ? " and that 's what was happening with the interaction with my cousins before ,
and now they can just do it in the intimacy of their own room .
the other thing that happened is -- i put them on youtube just -- i saw no reason to make it private , so i let other people watch it ,
and then people started stumbling on it ,
and i started getting some comments and some letters and all sorts of feedback from random people from around the world .
and these are just a few .
this is actually from one of the original calculus videos .
and someone wrote just on youtube -- it was a youtube comment : " first time i smiled doing a derivative . "
and let 's pause here .
this person did a derivative and then they smiled .
and then in a response to that same comment -- this is on the thread .
you can go on youtube and look at these comments -- someone else wrote : " same thing here .
i actually got a natural high and a good mood for the entire day . since i remember seeing all of this matrix text in class , and here i 'm all like , ' i know kung fu . ' " and we get a lot of feedback all along those lines .
this clearly was helping people .
but then , as the viewership kept growing and kept growing , i started getting letters from people , and it was starting to become clear that it was actually more than just a nice - to - have .
this is just an excerpt from one of those letters .
" my 12 year - old son has autism and has had a terrible time with math .
we have tried everything , viewed everything , bought everything .
we stumbled on your video on decimals and it got through .
then we went on to the dreaded fractions . again , he got it .
we could not believe it .
he is so excited . " and so you can imagine , here i was an analyst at a hedge fund . it was very strange for me to do something of social value .
but i was excited , so i kept going .
and then a few other things started to dawn on me .
that , not only would it help my cousins right now , or these people who are sending letters , but that this content will never go old , that it could help their kids or their grandkids .
if isaac newton had done youtube videos on calculus , i would n't have to .
assuming he was good . we do n't know .
the other thing that happened -- and even at this point , i said , " okay , maybe it 's a good supplement .
it 's good for motivated students .
it 's good for maybe home schoolers . " but i did n't think it would be something that would somehow penetrate the classroom .
but then i started getting letters from teachers .
and the teachers would write , saying , " we 've used your videos to flip the classroom .
you 've given the lectures , so now what we do ... " -- and this could happen in every classroom in america tomorrow -- " ... what i do is i assign the lectures for homework ,
and what used to be homework , i now have the students doing in the classroom . " and i want to pause here for -- i want to pause here for a second , because there 's a couple of interesting things .
one , when those teachers are doing that , there 's the obvious benefit -- the benefit that now their students can enjoy the videos in the way that my cousins did .
they can pause , repeat at their own pace , at their own time .
but the more interesting thing is -- and this is the unintuitive thing when you talk about technology in the classroom -- by removing the one - size - fits - all lecture from the classroom and letting students have a self - paced lecture at home , and then when you go to the classroom , letting them do work , having the teacher walk around , having the peers actually be able to interact with each other , these teachers have used technology to humanize the classroom .
they took a fundamentally dehumanizing experience -- 30 kids with their fingers on their lips , not allowed to interact with each other .
a teacher , no matter how good , has to give this one - size - fits - all lecture to 30 students -- blank faces , slightly antagonistic -- and now it 's a human experience .
now they 're actually interacting with each other .
so once the khan academy -- i quit my job and we turned into a real organization -- we 're a not - for - profit -- the question is , how do we take this to the next level ?
how do we take what those teachers are doing to their natural conclusion ?
and so what i 'm showing you over here , these are actual exercises that i started writing for my cousins .
the ones i started were much more primitive .
this is a more competent version of it .
but the paradigm here is , we 'll generate as many questions as you need until you get that concept , until you get 10 in a row .
and the khan academy videos are there .
you get hints , the actual steps for that problem , if you do n't know how to do it .
but the paradigm here , it seems like a very simple thing : 10 in a row , you move on .
but it 's fundamentally different than what 's happening in classrooms right now .
in a traditional classroom , you have a couple of homework , homework , lecture , homework , lecture , and then you have a snapshot exam .
and that exam , whether you get a 70 percent , an 80 percent , a 90 percent or a 95 percent , the class moves on to the next topic .
and even that 95 percent student , what was the five percent they did n't know ?
maybe they did n't know what happens when you raise something to the zero power .
and then you go build on that in the next concept .
that 's analogous to imagine learning to ride a bicycle , and maybe i give you a lecture ahead of time , and i give you that bicycle for two weeks .
and then i come back after two weeks , and i say , " well , let 's see . you 're having trouble taking left turns .
you ca n't quite stop .
you 're an 80 percent bicyclist . " so i put a big c stamp on your forehead and then i say , " here 's a unicycle . " but as ridiculous as that sounds , that 's exactly what 's happening in our classrooms right now .
and the idea is you fast forward and good students start failing algebra all of a sudden and start failing calculus all of a sudden , despite being smart , despite having good teachers ,
and it 's usually because they have these swiss cheese gaps that kept building throughout their foundation .
so our model is learn math the way you 'd learn anything , like the way you would learn a bicycle .
stay on that bicycle . fall off that bicycle .
do it as long as necessary until you have mastery .
the traditional model , it penalizes you for experimentation and failure , but it does not expect mastery .
we encourage you to experiment . we encourage you to failure .
but we do expect mastery .
this is just another one of the modules .
this is trigonometry .
this is shifting and reflecting functions .
and they all fit together .
we have about 90 of these right now .
and you can go to the site right now . it 's all free . not trying to sell anything .
but the general idea is that they all fit into this knowledge map .
that top node right there , that 's literally single digit addition .
it 's like one plus one is equal to two .
and the paradigm is , once you get 10 in a row on that , it keeps forwarding you to more and more advanced modules .
so if you keep further down the knowledge map , we 're getting into more advanced arithmetic .
further down , you start getting into pre - algebra and early algebra .
further down , you start getting into algebra one , algebra two , a little bit of precalculus .
and the idea is , from this we can actually teach everything -- well , everything that can be taught in this type of a framework .
so you can imagine -- and this is what we are working on -- is from this knowledge map you have logic , you have computer programming , you have grammar , you have genetics , all based off of that core of , if you know this and that , now you 're ready for this next concept .
now that can work well for an individual learner , and i encourage , one , for you to do it with your kids , but i also encourage everyone in the audience to do it yourself .
it 'll change what happens at the dinner table .
but what we want to do is to use the natural conclusion of the flipping of the classroom that those early teachers had emailed me about .
and so what i 'm showing you here , this is actually data from a pilot in the los altos school district , where they took two fifth grade classes and two seventh grade classes and completely gutted their old math curriculum .
these kids are n't using textbooks , they 're not getting one - size - fits - all lectures .
they 're doing khan academy , they 're doing that software , for roughly half of their math class .
and i want to make it clear , we do n't view this as the complete math education .
what it does is -- and this is what 's happening in los altos -- it frees up time .
this is the blocking and tackling , making sure you know how to move through a system of equations , and it frees up time for the simulations , for the games , for the mechanics , for the robot building , for the estimating how high that hill is based on its shadow .
and so the paradigm is the teacher walks in every day , every kid works at their own pace -- and this is actually a live dashboard from los altos school district -- and they look at this dashboard .
every row is a student .
every column is one of those concepts .
green means the student 's already proficient .
blue means they 're working on it -- no need to worry .
red means they 're stuck .
and what the teacher does is literally just say , " let me intervene on the red kids . " or even better , " let me get one of the green kids who are already proficient in that concept to be the first line of attack and actually tutor their peer . " now i come from a very data - centric reality , so we do n't want that teacher to even go and intervene and have to ask the kid awkward questions : " oh , what do you not understand ? " or " what do you do understand ? " and all of the rest .
so our paradigm is to really arm the teachers with as much data as possible -- really data that , in almost any other field , is expected , if you 're in finance or marketing or manufacturing --
and so the teachers can actually diagnose what 's wrong with the students so they can make their interaction as productive as possible .
so now the teachers know exactly what the students have been up to , how long they have been spending every day , what videos have they been watching , when did they pause the videos , what did they stop watching , what exercises are they using , what have they been focused on ?
the outer circle shows what exercises they were focused on .
the inner circle shows the videos they 're focused on .
and the data gets pretty granular so you can see the exact problems that the student got right or wrong .
red is wrong , blue is right .
the leftmost question is the first question that the student attempted .
they watched the video right over there .
and then you can see , eventually , they were able to get 10 in a row .
it 's almost like you can see them learning over those last 10 problems .
they also got faster .
the height is how long it took them .
so when you talk about self - paced learning , it makes sense for everyone -- in education - speak , differentiated learning -- but it 's kind of crazy when you see it in a classroom .
because every time we 've done this , in every classroom we 've done , over and over again , if you go five days into it , there 's a group of kids who 've raced ahead and there 's a group of kids who are a little bit slower .
and in a traditional model , if you did a snapshot assessment , you say , " these are the gifted kids , these are the slow kids .
maybe they should be tracked differently .
maybe we should put them in different classes . " but when you let every student work at their own pace -- and we see it over and over and over again -- you see students who took a little bit [ of ] extra time on one concept or the other , but once they get through that concept , they just race ahead .
and so the same kids that you thought were slow six weeks ago , you now would think are gifted .
and we 're seeing it over and over and over again .
and it makes you really wonder how much all of the labels maybe a lot of us have benefited from were really just due to a coincidence of time .
now as valuable as something like this is in a district like los altos , our goal is to use technology to humanize , not just in los altos , but on a global scale , what 's happening in education .
and actually , that kind of brings an interesting point .
a lot of the effort in humanizing the classroom is focused on student - to - teacher ratios .
in our mind , the relevant metric is student - to - valuable - human - time - with - the - teacher ratio .
so in a traditional model , most of the teacher 's time is spent doing lectures and grading and whatnot .
maybe five percent of their time is actually sitting next to students and actually working with them .
now 100 percent of their time is .
so once again , using technology , not just flipping the classroom , you 're humanizing the classroom , i 'd argue , by a factor of five or 10 .
and as valuable as that is in los altos , imagine what that does to the adult learner who 's embarrassed to go back and learn stuff that they should have before , before going back to college .
imagine what it does to a street kid in calcutta who has to help his family during the day , and that 's the reason why he or she ca n't go to school .
now they can spend two hours a day and remediate , or get up to speed and not feel embarrassed about what they do or do n't know .
now imagine what happens where -- we talked about the peers teaching each other inside of a classroom .
but this is all one system .
there 's no reason why you ca n't have that peer - to - peer tutoring beyond that one classroom .
imagine what happens if that student in calcutta all of a sudden can tutor your son , or your son can tutor that kid in calcutta ?
and i think what you 'll see emerging is this notion of a global one - world classroom .
and that 's essentially what we 're trying to build .
thank you .
bill gates : i 've seen some things you 're doing in the system that have to do with motivation and feedback -- energy points , merit badges .
tell me what you 're thinking there .
sk : oh yeah . no , we have an awesome team working on it .
and i have to make it clear , it 's not just me anymore .
i 'm still doing all the videos , but we have a rockstar team doing the software .
yeah , we 've put a bunch of game mechanics in there where you get these badges , we 're going to start having leader boards by area , and you get points .
it 's actually been pretty interesting .
just the wording of the badging or how many points you get for doing something , we see on a system - wide basis , like tens of thousands of fifth graders or sixth graders going one direction or another , depending what badge you give them .
bg : and the collaboration you 're doing with los altos , how did that come about ?
sk : los altos , it was kind of crazy .
once again , i did n't expect it to be used in classrooms .
someone from their board came and said , " what would you do if you had carte blanche in a classroom ? " and i said , " well , i would just , every student work at their own pace on something like this and we 'd give a dashboard . " and they said , " oh , this is kind of radical . we have to think about it . " and me and the rest of the team were like , " they 're never going to want to do this . " but literally the next day they were like , " can you start in two weeks ? " bg : so fifth grade math is where that 's going on right now ?
sk : it 's two fifth grade classes and two seventh grade classes .
and they 're doing it at the district level .
i think what they 're excited about is they can now follow these kids .
it 's not an only - in - school thing .
we 've even , on christmas , we saw some of the kids were doing it .
and we can track everything .
so they can actually track them as they go through the entire district .
through the summers , as they go from one teacher to the next , you have this continuity of data that even at the district level they can see .
bg : so some of those views we saw were for the teacher to go in and track actually what 's going on with those kids .
so you 're getting feedback on those teacher views to see what they think they mean ?
sk : oh yeah . most of those were specs by the teachers .
we made some of those for students so they could see their data , but we have a very tight design loop with the teachers themselves .
and they 're literally saying , " hey , this is nice , but ... " like that focus graph , a lot of the teachers said , " i have a feeling that a lot of the kids are jumping around and not focusing on one topic . " so we made that focus diagram .
so it 's all been teacher - driven .
it 's been pretty crazy .
bg : is this ready for prime time ?
do you think a lot of classes next school year should try this thing out ?
sk : yeah , it 's ready .
we 've got a million people on the site already , so we can handle a few more .
no , no reason why it really ca n't happen in every classroom in america tomorrow .
bg : and the vision of the tutoring thing .
the idea there is , if i 'm confused about a topic , somehow right in the user interface i 'd find people who are volunteering , maybe see their reputation , and i could schedule and connect up with those people ?
sk : absolutely . and this is something that i recommend everyone in this audience to do .
those dashboards the teachers have , you can go log in right now and you can essentially become a coach for your kids , or nephews , or cousins , or maybe some kids at the boys and girls club .
and yeah , you can start becoming a mentor , a tutor , really immediately .
but yeah , it 's all there .
bg : well , it 's amazing .
i think you just got a glimpse of the future of education .
thank you .
