my topic is economic growth in china and india .
and the question i want to explore with you is whether or not democracy has helped or has hindered economic growth .
you may say this is not fair , because i 'm selecting two countries to make a case against democracy .
actually , exactly the opposite is what i 'm going to do .
i 'm going to use these two countries to make an economic argument for democracy , rather than against democracy .
the first question there is why china has grown so much faster than india .
over the last 30 years , in terms of the gdp growth rates , china has grown at twice the rate of india .
in the last five years , the two countries have begun to converge somewhat in economic growth .
but over the last 30 years , china undoubtedly has done much better than india .
one simple answer is china has shanghai and india has mumbai .
look at the skyline of shanghai .
this is the pudong area .
the picture on india is the dharavi slum of mumbai in india .
the idea there behind these two pictures is that the chinese government can act above rule of law .
it can plan for the long - term benefits of the country and in the process , evict millions of people -- that 's just a small technical issue .
whereas in india , you cannot do that , because you have to listen to the public .
you 're being constrained by the public 's opinion .
even prime minister manmohan singh agrees with that view .
in an interview printed in the financial press of india , he said that he wants to make mumbai another shanghai .
this is an oxford - trained economist steeped in humanistic values , and yet he agrees with the high - pressure tactics of shanghai .
so let me call it the shanghai model of economic growth , that emphasizes the following features for promoting economic development : infrastructures , airports , highways , bridges , things like that .
and you need a strong government to do that , because you cannot respect private property rights .
you cannot be constrained by the public 's opinion .
you need also state ownership , especially of land assets , in order to build and roll out infrastructures very quickly .
the implication of that model is that democracy is a hindrance for economic growth , rather than a facilitator of economic growth .
here 's the key question . just how important are infrastructures for economic growth ?
this is a key issue .
if you believe that infrastructures are very important for economic growth , then you would argue a strong government is necessary to promote growth .
if you believe that infrastructures are not as important as many people believe , then you will put less emphasis on strong government .
so to illustrate that question , let me give you two countries .
and for the sake of brevity , i 'll call one country country 1 and the other country country 2 .
country 1 has a systematic advantage over country 2 in infrastructures .
country 1 has more telephones , and country 1 has a longer system of railways .
so if i were to ask you , " which is china and which is india , and which country has grown faster ? " if you believe in the infrastructure view , then you will say , " country 1 must be china .
they must have done better , in terms of economic growth .
and country 2 is possibly india . "
actually the country with more telephones is the soviet union , and the data referred to 1989 .
after the country reported very impressive statistics on telephones , the country collapsed .
that 's not too good .
the picture there is khrushchev .
i know that in 1989 he no longer ruled the soviet union , but that 's the best picture that i can find .
telephones , infrastructures do not guarantee you economic growth .
country 2 , that has fewer telephones , is china .
since 1989 , the country has performed at a double - digit rate every year for the last 20 years .
if you know nothing about china and the soviet union other than the fact about their telephones , you would have made a poor prediction about their economic growth in the next two decades .
country 1 , that has a longer system of railways , is actually india .
and country 2 is china .
this is a very little known fact about the two countries .
yes , today china has a huge infrastructure advantage over india .
but for many years , until the late 1990s , china had an infrastructure disadvantage vis - a - vis india .
in developing countries , the most common mode of transportation is the railways , and the british built a lot of railways in india .
india is the smaller of the two countries , and yet it had a longer system of railways until the late 1990s .
so clearly , infrastructure does n't explain why china did better before the late 1990s , as compared with india .
in fact , if you look at the evidence worldwide , the evidence is more supportive of the view that the infrastructure are actually the result of economic growth . the economy grows , government accumulates more resources , and the government can invest in infrastructure -- rather than infrastructure being a cause for economic growth .
and this is clearly the story of the chinese economic growth .
let me look at this question more directly .
is democracy bad for economic growth ?
now let 's turn to two countries , country a and country b.
country a , in 1990 , had about $ 300 per capita gdp as compared with country b , which had $ 460 in per capita gdp .
by 2008 , country a has surpassed country b with $ 700 per capita gdp as compared with $ 650 per capita gdp .
both countries are in asia .
if i were to ask you , " which are the two asian countries ?
and which one is a democracy ? " you may argue , " well , maybe country a is china and country b is india . "
in fact , country a is democratic india , and country b is pakistan -- the country that has a long period of military rule .
and it 's very common that we compare india with china .
that 's because the two countries have about the same population size .
but the more natural comparison is actually between india and pakistan .
those two countries are geographically similar .
they have a complicated , but shared common history .
by that comparison , democracy looks very , very good in terms of economic growth .
so why do economists fall in love with authoritarian governments ?
one reason is the east asian model .
in east asia , we have had successful economic growth stories such as korea , taiwan , hong kong and singapore .
some of these economies were ruled by authoritarian governments in the 60s and 70s and 1980s .
the problem with that view is like asking all the winners of lotteries , " have you won the lottery ? "
and they all tell you , " yes , we have won the lottery . "
and then you draw the conclusion the odds of winning the lottery are 100 percent .
the reason is you never go and bother to ask the losers who also purchased lottery tickets and did n't end up winning the prize .
for each of these successful authoritarian governments in east asia , there 's a matched failure .
korea succeeded , north korea did n't .
taiwan succeeded , china under mao zedong did n't .
burma did n't succeed .
the philippines did n't succeed .
if you look at the statistical evidence worldwide , there 's really no support for the idea that authoritarian governments hold a systematic edge over democracies in terms of economic growth .
so the east asian model has this massive selection bias -- it is known as selecting on a dependent variable , something we always tell our students to avoid .
so exactly why did china grow so much faster ?
i will take you to the cultural revolution , when china went mad , and compare that country 's performance with india under indira gandhi .
the question there is : which country did better , china or india ?
china was during the cultural revolution .
it turns out even during the cultural revolution , china out - perfomed india in terms of gdp growth by an average of about 2.2 percent every year in terms of per capita gdp .
so that 's when china was mad . the whole country went mad .
it must mean that the country had something so advantageous to itself in terms of economic growth to overcome the negative effects of the cultural revolution .
the advantage the country had was human capital -- nothing else but human capital .
this is the world development index indicator data in the early 1990s .
and this is the earliest data that i can find .
the adult literacy rate in china is 77 percent as compared with 48 percent in india .
the contrast in literacy rates is especially sharp between chinese women and indian women .
i have n't told you about the definition of literacy .
in china , the definition of literacy is the ability to read and write 1,500 chinese characters .
in india , the definition of literacy , operating definition of literacy , is the ability , the grand ability , to write your own name in whatever language you happen to speak .
the gap between the two countries in terms of literacy is much more substantial than the data here indicated .
if you go to other sources of data such as human development index , that data series , go back to the early 1970s , you see exactly the same contrast .
china held a huge advantage in terms of human capital vis - a - vis india .
life expectancies : as early as 1965 , china had a huge advantage in life expectancy .
on average , as a chinese in 1965 , you lived 10 years more than an average indian .
so if you have a choice between being a chinese and being an indian , you would want to become a chinese in order to live 10 years longer .
if you made that decision in 1965 , the down side of that is the next year we have the cultural revolution .
so you have to always think carefully about these decisions .
if you cannot chose your nationality , then you will want to become an indian man .
because , as an indian man , you have about two years of life expectancy advantage vis - a - vis indian women .
this is an extremely strange fact .
it 's very rare among countries to have this kind of pattern .
it shows the systematic discrimination and biases in the indian society against women .
the good news is , by 2006 , india has closed the gap between men and women in terms of life expectancy .
today , indian women have a sizable life expectancy edge over indian men .
so india is reverting to the normal .
but india still has a lot of work to do in terms of gender equality .
these are the two pictures taken of garment factories in guangdong province and garment factories in india .
in china , it 's all women .
60 to 80 percent of the workforce in china is women in the coastal part of the country , whereas in india , it 's all men .
financial times printed this picture of an indian textile factory with the title , " india poised to overtake china in textile . "
by looking at these two pictures , i say no , it wo n't overtake china for a while .
if you look at other east asian countries , women there play a hugely important role in terms of economic take - off -- in terms of creating the manufacturing miracle associated with east asia .
india still has a long way to go to catch up with china .
then the issue is , what about the chinese political system ?
you talk about human capital , you talk about education and public health .
what about the political system ?
is n't it true that the one - party political system has facilitated economic growth in china ?
actually , the answer is more nuanced and subtle than that .
it depends on a distinction that you draw between statics of the political system and the dynamics of the political system .
statically , china is a one - party system , authoritarian -- there 's no question about it .
dynamically , it has changed over time to become less authoritarian and more democratic .
when you explain change -- for example , economic growth ; economic growth is about change -- when you explain change , you use other things that have changed to explain change , rather than using the constant to explain change .
sometimes a fixed effect can explain change , but a fixed effect only explains changes in interaction with the things that change .
in terms of the political changes , they have introduced village elections .
they have increased the security of proprietors .
and they have increased the security with long - term land leases .
there are also financial reforms in rural china .
there is also a rural entrepreneurial revolution in china .
to me , the pace of political changes is too slow , too gradual .
and my own view is the country is going to face some substantial challenges , because they have not moved further and faster on political reforms .
but nevertheless , the system has moved in a more liberal direction , moved in a more democratic direction .
you can apply exactly the same dynamic perspective on india .
in fact , when india was growing at a hindu rate of growth -- about one percent , two percent a year -- that was when india was least democratic .
indira gandhi declared emergency rule in 1975 .
the indian government owned and operated all the tv stations .
a little - known fact about india in the 1990s is that the country not only has undertaken economic reforms , the country has also undertaken political reforms by introducing village self - rule , privatization of media and introducing freedom of information acts .
so the dynamic perspective fits both with china and in india in terms of the direction .
why do many people believe that india is still a growth disaster ?
one reason is they are always comparing india with china .
but china is a superstar in terms of economic growth .
if you are a nba player and you are always being compared to michael jordan , you 're going to look not so impressive .
but that does n't mean that you 're a bad basketball player .
comparing with a superstar is the wrong benchmark .
in fact , if you compare india with the average developing country , even before the more recent period of acceleration of indian growth -- now india is growing between eight and nine percent -- even before this period , india was ranked fourth in terms of economic growth among emerging economies .
this is a very impressive record indeed .
let 's think about the future : the dragon vis - a - vis the elephant .
which country has the growth momentum ?
china , i believe , still has some of the excellent raw fundamentals -- mostly the social capital , the public health , the sense of egalitarianism that you do n't find in india .
but i believe that india has the momentum .
it has the improving fundamentals . the government has invested in basic education , has invested in basic health .
i believe the government should do more , but nevertheless , the direction it is moving in is the right direction .
india has the right institutional conditions for economic growth , whereas china is still struggling with political reforms .
i believe that the political reforms are a must for china to maintain its growth .
and it 's very important to have political reforms , to have widely shared benefits of economic growth .
i do n't know whether that 's going to happen or not , but i 'm an optimist .
hopefully , five years from now , i 'm going to report to tedglobal that political reforms will happen in china .
thank you very much .
