this is a work in process , based on some comments that were made at ted two years ago about the need for the storage of vaccine .
narrator : on this planet , 1.6 billion people do n't have access to electricity , refrigeration or stored fuels . this is a problem . it impacts : the spread of disease , the storage of food and medicine and the quality of life . so here 's the plan : inexpensive refrigeration that does n't use electricity , propane , gas , kerosene or consumables . time for some thermodynamics . and the story of the intermittent absorption refrigerator . adam grosser : so 29 years ago , i had this thermo teacher who talked about absorption and refrigeration .
it 's one of those things that stuck in my head .
it was a lot like the stirling engine : it was cool , but you did n't know what to do with it .
and it was invented in 1858 , by this guy ferdinand carre , but he could n't actually build anything with it because of the tools of the time .
this crazy canadian named powel crosley commercialized this thing called the icyball in 1928 , and it was a really neat idea , and i 'll get to why it did n't work , but here 's how it works .
there 's two spheres and they 're separated in distance .
one has a working fluid , water and ammonia , and the other is a condenser .
you heat up one side , the hot side .
the ammonia evaporates and it re - condenses in the other side .
you let it cool to room temperature , and then , as the ammonia re - evaporates and combines with the water back on the erstwhile hot side , it creates a powerful cooling effect .
so , it was a great idea that did n't work at all : it blew up .
because using ammonia you get hugely high pressures if you heated them wrong .
it topped 400 psi . the ammonia was toxic . it sprayed everywhere .
but it was kind of an interesting thought .
so , the great thing about 2006 is there 's a lot of really great computational work you can do .
so , we got the whole thermodynamics department at stanford involved --
a lot of computational fluid dynamics .
we proved that most of the ammonia refrigeration tables are wrong .
we found some non - toxic refrigerants that worked at very low vapor pressures .
brought in a team from the u.k. -- there 's a lot of great refrigeration people , it turned out , in the u.k. -- and built a test rig , and proved that , in fact , we could make a low pressure , non - toxic refrigerator .
so , this is the way it works .
you put it on a cooking fire .
most people have cooking fires in the world , whether it 's camel dung or wood .
it heats up for about 30 minutes , cools for an hour .
put it into a container and it will refrigerate for 24 hours .
it looks like this . this is the fifth prototype . it 's not quite done .
weighs about eight pounds , and this is the way it works . you put it into a 15 - liter vessel , about three gallons , and it 'll cool it down to just above freezing -- three degrees above freezing --
for 24 hours in a 30 degree c environment . it 's really cheap .
we think we can build these in high volumes for about 25 dollars , in low volumes for about 40 dollars .
and we think we can make refrigeration something that everybody can have .
thank you .
