this is aunt zip from sodom , north carolina .
she was 105 years old when i took this picture . she was always saying things that made me stop and think , like , " time may be a great healer , but it ai n't no beauty specialist . " she said , " be good to your friends .
why , without them , you 'd be a total stranger . "
this is one of her songs .
let 's see if we can get into the flow here and all do this one together .
and i 'm going to have michael manring play bass with me .
give him a big old hand .
one , two , three , four .
well , my true love 's a black - eyed daisy ; if i do n't see her , i go crazy .
my true love lives up the river ; a few more jumps and i 'll be with her .
hey , hey , black - eyed susie ! hey , hey , black - eyed susie !
hey , hey black - eyed susie , hey .
now you 've got to picture aunt zip at 105 years old in sodom , north carolina .
i 'd go up and learn these old songs from her .
she could n't sing much , could n't play anymore .
and i 'd pull her out on the front porch .
down below , there was her grandson plowing the tobacco field with a mule .
a double outhouse over here on the side .
and we 'd sing this old song . she did n't have a whole lot of energy , so i 'd sing , " hey , hey ! " and she 'd just answer back with , " black - eyed susie . "
oh , hey , hey , black - eyed susie ! hey , hey , black - eyed susie !
hey , hey , black - eyed susie , hey .
well , she and i went blackberry picking .
she got mad ; i took a licking .
ducks on the millpond , geese in the ocean , devil in the pretty girl when she takes a notion .
hey , hey , black - eyed susie ! hey , hey , black - eyed susie !
hey , hey black - eyed susie , hey .
let 's have the banjo .
well , we 'll get married next thanksgiving .
i 'll lay around ; she 'll make a living .
she 'll cook blackjacks , i 'll cook gravy ; we 'll have chicken someday , maybe .
hey , hey , hey , hey . hey , hey , black - eyed susie , hey !
one more time now .
oh , hey , hey , black - eyed susie ! hey , hey , black - eyed susie !
hey , hey , black - eyed susie , hey .
thank you , michael .
this is ralph stanley .
when i was going to college at university of california at santa barbara in the college of creative studies , taking majors in biology and art , he came to the campus .
this was in 1968 , i guess it was .
and he played his bluegrass style of music , but near the end of the concert , he played the old timing style of banjo picking that came from africa , along with the banjo .
it 's called claw - hammer style , that he had learned from his mother and grandmother .
i fell in love with that .
i went up to him and said , how can i learn that ?
he said , well , you can go back to clinch mountain , where i 'm from , or asheville or mount airy , north carolina -- some place that has a lot of music .
because there 's a lot of old people still living that play that old style .
so i went back that very summer .
i just fell in love with the culture and the people .
and you know , i came back to school , i finished my degrees and told my parents i wanted to be a banjo player .
you can imagine how excited they were .
so i thought i would just like to show you some of the pictures i 've taken of some of my mentors .
just a few of them , but maybe you 'll get just a little hint of some of these folks .
and play a little banjo . let 's do a little medley .
those last few pictures were of ray hicks , who just passed away last year .
he was one of the great american folk tale - tellers .
the old jack tales that he had learned -- he talked like this , you could hardly understand him . but it was really wonderful .
and he lived in that house that his great - grandfather had built .
no running water , no electricity . a wonderful , wonderful guy .
and you can look at more pictures .
i 've actually got a website that 's got a bunch of photos that i 've done of some of the other folks i did n't get a chance to show you .
this instrument came up in those pictures . it 's called the mouth bow .
it is definitely the first stringed instrument ever in the world , and still played in the southern mountains .
now , the old timers did n't take a fancy guitar string and make anything like this .
they would just take a stick and a catgut and string it up .
it was hard on the cats , but it made a great little instrument .
it sounds something like this .
well , have you heard the many stories told by young and old with joy about the many deeds of daring that were done by the johnson boys ?
you take kate , i 'll take sal ; we 'll both have a johnson gal .
you take kate , i 'll take sal ; we 'll both have a johnson gal .
now , they were scouts in the rebels ' army , they were known both far and wide .
when the yankees saw them coming , they 'd lay down their guns and hide .
you take kate , i 'll take sal ; we 'll both have a johnson gal .
you take kate , i 'll take sal ; we 'll both have a johnson gal .
ai n't that a sound ?
well , it was 1954 , i guess it was .
we were driving in the car outside of gatesville , texas , where i grew up in the early part of my life .
outside of gatesville we were coming back from the grocery store .
my mom was driving ; my brother and i were in the back seat .
we were really mad at my mom . we looked out the window .
we were surrounded by thousands of acres of cotton fields .
you see , we 'd just been to the grocery store , and my mom refused to buy us the jar of ovaltine that had the coupon for the captain midnight decoder ring in it .
and , buddy , that made us mad .
well , my mom did n't put up with much either , and she was driving , and she said , " you boys ! you think you can have anything you want .
you do n't know how hard it is to earn money . your dad works so hard .
you think money grows on trees . you 've never worked a day in your lives .
you boys make me so mad . you 're going to get a job this summer . "
she pulled the car over ; she said , " get out of the car . "
my brother and i stepped out of the car .
we were standing on the edge of thousands of acres of cotton .
there were about a hundred black folks out there picking .
my mom grabbed us by the shoulders . she marched us out in the field .
she went up to the foreman ; she said , " i 've got these two little boys never worked a day in their lives . "
of course , we were just eight and 10 .
she said , " would you put them to work ? "
well , that must have seemed like a funny idea to that foreman : put these two middle - class little white boys out in a cotton field in august in texas -- it 's hot .
so he gave us each a cotton sack , about 10 feet long , about that big around , and we started picking .
now , cotton is soft but the outside of the plant is just full of stickers .
and if you do n't know what you 're doing , your hands are bleeding in no time .
and my brother and i started to pick it , and our hands were startin ' to bleed , and then -- " mom ! " and mom was just sitting by the car like this .
she was n't going to give up .
well , the foreman could see he was in over his head , i guess .
he kind of just snuck up behind us and he sang out in a low voice .
he just sang : " well , there 's a long white robe in heaven , i know .
do n't want it to leave me behind .
well , there 's a long white robe in heaven , i know .
do n't want it to leave me behind . "
and from all around as people started singing and answering back , he sang : " good news , good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
and i do n't want it to leave me behind . "
now , my brother and i had never heard anything like that in our whole lives . it was so beautiful .
we sat there all day picking cotton , without complaining , without crying , while they sang things like : " oh , mary , do n't you weep , do n't you moan " and " wade in the water , " and " i done done , " " this little light of mine . " finally , by the end of the day , we 'd each picked about a quarter of a bag of cotton .
but the foreman was kind enough to give us each a check for a dollar , but my mother would never let us cash it .
i 'm 57 ; still have the check .
now , my mother hoped that we learned from that the value of hard work .
but if you have children , you know it does n't often work that way .
no , we learned something else .
the first thing i learned that day was that i never ever wanted to work that hard again .
and pretty much never did .
but i also learned that some people in this world do have to work that hard every day , and that was an eye - opener .
and i also learned that a great song can make hard work go a little easier .
and it also can bring the group together in a way that nothing else can .
now , i was just a little eight - year - old boy that day when my mama put me out of the car in that hot texas cotton field .
i was n't even aware of music -- not even aware of it .
but that day in the cotton field out there picking , when those people started singing , i realized i was in the very heart of real music , and that 's where i 've wanted to be ever since .
try this old song with me . i sing : well , there 's a long white robe in heaven , i know .
well , there 's a long white robe in heaven , i know .
do n't want it to leave me behind .
good news , good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
and i do n't want it to leave me -- it 's been a while since you guys have been picking your last bale of cotton , is n't it ?
let 's try it one more time .
there 's a starry crown in heaven , i know .
do n't want it to leave me behind .
there 's a starry crown in heaven , i know .
do n't want it to leave me behind .
good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
and i do n't want it to leave me behind .
it was a few years ago , but i sort of remembered this story , and i told it at a concert .
my mom was in the audience .
after the -- she was glad to have a story about herself , of course , but after the concert she came up and she said , " david , i 've got to tell you something .
i set that whole thing up .
i set it up with the foreman . i set it up with the owner of the land .
i just wanted you boys to learn the value of hard work .
i did n't know it was going to make you fall in love with music though . "
let 's try . good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
good news : chariot 's coming .
and i do n't want it to leave me behind .
well , this is the steel guitar . it 's an american - made instrument .
it was originally made by the dopyera brothers , who later on made the dobro , which is a wood - bodied instrument with a metal cone for -- where the sound comes from .
it 's usually played flat on your lap .
it was made to play hawaiian music back in the 1920s , before they had electric guitars , trying to make a loud guitar .
and then african - american folks figured out you could take a broken bottle neck , just like that -- a nice merlot works very well .
that wine we had yesterday would have been perfect .
break it off , put it on your finger , and slide into the notes .
this instrument pretty much saved my life .
fifteen years ago , 14 years ago , i guess , this year , my wife and i lost our daughter , sarah jane , in a car accident , and it was the most -- it almost took me out -- it almost took me out of this world .
and i think i learned a lot about what happiness was by going through such unbelievable grief , just standing on the edge of that abyss and just wanting to jump in .
i had to make lists of reasons to stay alive .
i had to sit down and make lists , because i was ready to go ; i was ready to check out of this world .
and you know , at the top of the list , of course , were jenny , and my son , zeb , my parents -- i did n't want to hurt them .
but then , when i thought about it beyond that , it was very simple things .
i did n't care about -- i had a radio show , i have a radio show on public radio , " riverwalk , " i did n't care about that . i did n't care about awards or money or anything .
nothing . nothing .
on the list it would be stuff like , seeing the daffodils bloom in the spring , the smell of new - mown hay , catching a wave and bodysurfing , the touch of a baby 's hand , the sound of doc watson playing the guitar , listening to old records of muddy waters and uncle dave macon .
and for me , the sound of a steel guitar , because one of my parents ' neighbors just gave me one of these things .
and i would sit around with it , and i did n't know how to play it , but i would just play stuff as sad as i could play .
and it was the only instrument that , of all the ones that i play , that would really make that connection .
this is a song that came out of that .
well , i hear you 're having trouble .
lord , i hate to hear that news .
if you want to talk about it , you know , i will listen to you through .
words no longer say it ; let me tell you what i always do .
i just break off another bottleneck and play these steel guitar blues .
people say , " oh , snap out of it ! "
oh yeah , that 's easier said than done .
while you can hardly move , they 're running around having all kinds of fun .
sometimes i think it 's better just to sink way down in your funky mood ' til you can rise up humming these steel guitar blues .
now , you can try to keep it all inside with drink and drugs and cigarettes , but you know that 's not going to get you where you want to get .
but i got some medicine here that just might shake things loose .
call me in the morning after a dose of these steel guitar blues .
open up now .
oh , i think i 've got time to tell you about this . my dad was an inventor .
we moved to california when sputnik went up , in 1957 .
and he was working on gyroscopes ; he has a number of patents for that kind of thing .
and we moved across the street from michael and john whitney .
they were about my age .
john went on , and michael did too , to become some of the inventors of computer animation .
michael 's dad was working on something called the computer .
this was 1957 , i was a little 10 - year - old kid ; i did n't know what that was . but he took me down to see one , you know , what they were making . it was like a library , just full of vacuum tubes as far as you could see , just floors and floors of these things , and one of the engineers said , some day you 're going to be able to put this thing in your pocket .
i thought , damn , those are going to be some big pants !
so that christmas -- maybe i 've got time for this -- that christmas i got the mister wizard fun - o - rama chemistry set .
well , i wanted to be an inventor just like my dad ; so did michael .
his great - granddad had been eli whitney , the inventor of the cotton gin .
so we looked in that -- this was a commercial chemistry set .
it had three chemicals we were really surprised to see : sulfur , potassium nitrate and charcoal .
man , we were only 10 , but we knew that made gunpowder .
we made up a little batch and we put it on the driveway and we threw a match and phew , it flared up . ah , it was great .
well , obviously the next thing to do was build a cannon .
so we went over into michael 's garage -- his dad had all kinds of stuff , and we put a pipe in the vice there , and screwed a cap on the end of the pipe , drilled a hole in the back of the pipe , took some of our firecrackers , pulled out the fuses , tied them together , put them in the back there , and -- down in that hole -- and then stuffed some of our gunpowder down that pipe and put three ball bearings on the top , in the garage .
we were n't stupid : we put up a sheet of plywood about five feet in front of it .
we stood back , we lit that thing , and they flew out of there -- they went through that plywood like it was paper .
through the garage .
two of them landed in the side door of his new citroen .
we tore everything down and buried it in his backyard .
that was pacific palisades ; it probably is still there , back there .
well , my brother heard that we had made gunpowder .
he and his buddies , they were older , and they were pretty mean .
they said they were going to beat us up if we did n't make some gunpowder for them .
we said , well , what are you going to do with it ?
they said , we 're going to melt it down and make rocket fuel .
sure . we 'll make you a big batch .
so we made them a big batch , and it was in my -- now , we 'd just moved here . we 'd just moved to california .
mom had redone the kitchen ; mom was gone that day . we had a pie tin .
it became chris berquist 's job to do the melting down .
michael and i were standing way at the side of the kitchen .
he said , " yeah , hey , it 's melting . yeah , the sulfur 's melting .
no problem . yeah , you know . "
it just flared up , and he turned around , and he looked like this .
no hair , no eyelashes , no nothing .
there were big welts all over my mom 's kitchen cabinet ; the air was the just full of black smoke .
she came home , she took that chemistry set away , and we never saw it again .
but we thought of it often , because every time she 'd cook tuna surprise it made -- tasted faintly of gunpowder .
so i like to invent things too , and i think i 'll close out my set with something i invented a good while back .
when drum machines were new , i got to thinking , why could n't you take the oldest form of music , the hambone rhythms , and combine it with the newest technology ?
i call this thunderwear .
at that time , drum triggers were new .
and so i put them all together and sewed 12 of them in this suit .
i showed you some of the hambone rhythms yesterday ; i 'm going to be doing some of the same ones .
i have a trigger here , trigger here , here , here . right there .
it 's going to really hurt if i do n't take that off . okay .
now , the drum triggers go out my tail here , into the drum machine , and they can make various sounds , like drums .
so let me put them all together . and also , i can change the sounds by stepping on this pedal right here , and -- let me just close out here by doing you a little hambone solo or something like this .
thank you , folks .
