good morning .
i 've come here to share with you an experiment of how to get rid of one form of human suffering .
it really is a story of dr. venkataswamy .
his mission and his message is about the aravind eye care system .
i think first it 's important for us to recognize what it is to be blind .
woman : everywhere i went looking for work , they said no , what use do we have for a blind woman ?
i could n't thread a needle or see the lice in my hair .
if an ant fell into my rice , i could n't see that either .
thulasiraj ravilla : becoming blind is a big part of it , but i think it also deprives the person of their livelihood , their dignity , their independence , and their status in the family .
so she is just one amongst the millions who are blind .
and the irony is that they do n't need to be .
a simple , well - proven surgery can restore sight to millions , and something even simpler , a pair of glasses , can make millions more see .
if we add to that the many of us here now who are more productive because they have a pair of glasses , then almost one in five indians will require eye care , a staggering 200 million people .
today , we 're reaching not even 10 percent of them .
so this is the context in which aravind came into existence about 30 years back as a post - retirement project of dr. v.
he started this with no money .
he had to mortgage all his life savings to make a bank loan .
and over time , we have grown into a network of five hospitals , predominately in the state of tamil nadu and puducherry , and then we added several , what we call vision centers as a hub - and - spoke model .
and then more recently we started managing hospitals in other parts of the country and also setting up hospitals in other parts of the world as well .
the last three decades , we have done about three - and - a - half million surgeries , a vast majority of them for the poor people .
now , each year we perform about 300,000 surgeries .
a typical day at aravind , we would do about a thousand surgeries , maybe see about 6,000 patients , send out teams into the villages to examine , bring back patients , lots of telemedicine consultations , and , on top of that , do a lot of training , both for doctors and technicians who will become the future staff of aravind .
and then doing this day - in and day - out , and doing it well , requires a lot of inspiration and a lot of hard work .
and i think this was possible thanks to the building blocks put in place by dr. v. , a value system , an efficient delivery process , and fostering the culture of innovation .
dr. v : i used to sit with the ordinary village man because i am from a village , and suddenly you turn around and seem to be in contact with his inner being , you seem to be one with him .
here is a soul which has got all the simplicity of confidence .
doctor , whatever you say , i accept it .
an implicit faith in you and then you respond to it .
here is an old lady who has got so much faith in me , i must do my best for her .
when we grow in spiritual consciousness , we identify ourselves with all that is in the world , so there is no exploitation .
it is ourselves we are helping .
it is ourselves we are healing .
this helped us build a very ethical and very highly patient - centric organization and systems that support it .
but on a practical level , you also have to deliver services efficiently , and , odd as it may seem , the inspiration came from mcdonald 's .
dr. v : see , mcdonald 's ' concept is simple .
they feel they can train people all over the world , irrespective of different religions , cultures , all those things , to produce a product in the same way and deliver it in the same manner in hundreds of places .
larry brilliant : he kept talking about mcdonalds and hamburgers , and none of it made any sense to us .
he wanted to create a franchise , a mechanism of delivery of eye care with the efficiency of mcdonald 's .
dr. v : supposing i 'm able to produce eye care , techniques , methods , all in the same way , and make it available in every corner of the world .
the problem of blindness is gone .
tr : if you think about it , i think the eyeball is the same , as american or african , the problem is the same , the treatment is the same .
and yet , why should there be so much variation in quality and in service , and that was the fundamental principle that we followed when we designed the delivery systems .
and , of course , the challenge was that it 's a huge problem , we are talking of millions of people , very little resource to deal with it , and then lots of logistics and affordability issues .
and then so , one had to constantly innovate .
and one of the early innovations , which still continues , is to create ownership in the community to the problem , and then engage with them as a partner , and here is one such event . here a community camp just organized by the community themselves , where they find a place , organize volunteers , and then we 'll do our part . you know , check their vision , and then you have doctors who you find out what the problem is and then determine what further testing should be done , and then those tests are done by technicians who check for glasses , or check for glaucoma .
and then , with all these results , the doctor makes a final diagnosis , and then prescribes a line of treatment , and if they need a pair of glasses , they are available right there at the camp site , usually under a tree .
but they get glasses in the frames of their choice , and that 's very important because i think glasses , in addition to helping people see , is also a fashion statement , and they 're willing to pay for it .
so they get it in about 20 minutes and those who require surgery , are counseled , and then there are buses waiting , which will transport them to the base hospital .
and if it was not for this kind of logistics and support , many people like this would probably never get services , and certainly not when they most need it .
they receive surgery the following day , and then they will stay for a day or two , and then they are put back on the buses to be taken back to where they came from , and where their families will be waiting to take them back home .
and this happens several thousand times each year .
it may sound impressive that we 're seeing lots of patients , very efficient process , but we looked at , are we solving the problem ?
we did a study , a scientifically designed process , and then , to our dismay , we found this was only reaching seven percent of those in need , and we 're not adequately addressing more , bigger problems .
so we had to do something different , so we set up what we call primary eye care centers , vision centers .
these are truly paperless offices with completely electronic medical records and so on .
they receive comprehensive eye exams .
we kind of changed the simple digital camera into a retinal camera , and then every patient gets their teleconsultation with a doctor .
the effect of this has been that , within the first year , we really had a 40 percent penetration in the market that it served , which is over 50,000 people .
and the second year went up to 75 percent .
so i think we have a process by which we can really penetrate into the market and reach everyone who needs it , and in this process of using technology , make sure that most do n't need to come to the base hospital .
and how much will they pay for this ?
we fixed the pricing , taking into account what they would save in bus fare in coming to a city , so they pay about 20 rupees , and that 's good for three consultations .
the other challenge was , how do you give high - tech or more advanced treatment and care ?
we designed a van with a vsat , which sends out images of patients to the base hospital where it is diagnosed , and then as the patient is waiting , the report goes back to the patient , it gets printed out , the patient gets it , and then gets a consultation about what they should be doing -- i mean , go see a doctor or come back after six months , and then this happens as a way of bridging the technology competence .
so the impact of all this has been essentially one of growing the market , because it focused on the non - customer , and then by reaching the unreached , we 're able to significantly grow the market .
the other aspect is how do you deal with this efficiently when you have very few ophthalmologists ?
so what is in this video is a surgeon operating , and then you see on the other side , another patient is getting ready .
so , as they finish the surgery , they just swing the microscope over , the tables are placed so that their distance is just right , and then we need to do this , because , by doing this kind of process , we 're able to more than quadruple the productivity of the surgeon .
and then to support the surgeon , we require a certain workforce .
and then we focused on village girls that we recruited , and then they really are the backbone of the organization .
they do almost all of the skill - based routine tasks .
they do one thing at a time . they do it extremely well .
with the result we have very high productivity , very high quality at very , very low cost .
so , putting all this together , what really happened was the productivity of our staff was significantly higher than anyone else .
this is a very busy table , but what this really is conveying is that , when it comes to quality , we have put in very good quality - assurance systems .
as a result , our complications are significantly lower than what has been reported in the united kingdom , and you do n't see those kind of numbers very often .
so the final part of the puzzle is , how do you make all this work financially , especially when the people ca n't pay for it ?
so what we did was , we gave away a lot of it for free , and then those who pay , i mean , they paid local market rates , nothing more , and often much less . and we were helped by the market inefficiency .
i think that has been a big savior , even now .
and , of course , one needs the mindset to be wanting to give away what you have as a surplus .
the result has been , over the years , the expenditure has increased with volumes .
the revenues increase at a higher level , giving us a healthy margin while you 're treating a large number of people for free .
i think in absolute terms , last year we earned about 20 - odd million dollars , spent about 13 million , with over a 40 percent ebita .
but this really requires going beyond what we do , or what we have done , if you really want to achieve solving this problem of blindness .
and what we did was a couple of very counter - intuitive things .
we created competition for ourselves , and then we made eye care affordable by making low - cost consumables .
we proactively and systematically promoted these practices to many hospitals in india , many in our own backyards and then in other parts of the world as well .
the impact of this has been that these hospitals , in the second year after our consultation , are double their output and then achieve financial recovery as well .
the other part was how do you address this increase in cost of technology ?
there was a time when we failed to negotiate the [ intra - ocular lens ] prices to be at affordable levels , so we set up a manufacturing unit .
and then , over time , we were able to bring down the cost significantly to about two percent of what it used to be when we started out .
today , we believe we have about seven percent of the global market , and they 're used in about 120 - odd countries .
to conclude , i mean , what we do , does it have a broader relevance , or is it just india or developing countries ?
so to address this , we studied uk versus aravind .
what it shows is that we do roughly about 60 percent of the volume of what the uk does , near a half - million surgeries as a whole country .
and we do about 300,000 .
and then we train about 50 ophthalmologists against the 70 trained by them , comparable quality , both in training and in patient care .
so we 're really comparing apples to apples .
we looked at cost .
so , i think it is simple to say just because the u.k. is n't india the difference is happening .
i think there is more to it .
i mean , i think one has to look at other aspects as well .
maybe there is -- the solution to the cost could be in productivity , maybe in efficiency , in the clinical process , or in how much they pay for the lenses or consumables , or regulations , their defensive practice .
so , i think decoding this can probably bring answers to most developed countries including the u.s. , and maybe obama 's ratings can go up again .
another insight , which , again , i want to leave with you , in conditions where the problem is very large , which cuts across all economic strata , where we have a good solution , i think the process i described , you know , productivity , quality , patient - centered care , can give an answer , and there are many which fit this paradigm .
you take dentistry , hearing aid , maternity and so on .
there are many where this paradigm can now play , but i think probably one of the most challenging things is on the softer side .
now , how do you create compassion ?
now , how do you make people own the problem , want to do something about it ?
there are a bit harder issues .
and i 'm sure people in this crowd can probably find the solutions to these .
so i want to end my talk leaving this thought and challenge to you .
dr. v : when you grow in spiritual consciousness , we identify with all that is in the world so there is no exploitation .
it is ourselves we are helping .
it is ourselves we are healing .
tr : thank you very much .
