so , imagine you 're standing on a street anywhere in america and a japanese man comes up to you and says , " excuse me , what is the name of this block ? "
and you say , " i 'm sorry , well , this is oak street , that 's elm street .
this is 26th , that 's 27th . "
he says , " ok , but what is the name of that block ? "
you say , " well , blocks do n't have names .
streets have names ; blocks are just the unnamed spaces in between streets . "
he leaves , a little confused and disappointed .
so , now imagine you 're standing on a street , anywhere in japan , you turn to a person next to you and say , " excuse me , what is the name of this street ? "
they say , " oh , well that 's block 17 and this is block 16. "
and you say , " ok , but what is the name of this street ? "
and they say , " well , streets do n't have names .
blocks have names .
just look at google maps here . there 's block 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 .
all of these blocks have names ,
and the streets are just the unnamed spaces in between the blocks .
and you say then , " ok , then how do you know your home address ? "
he said , " well , easy , this is district eight .
there 's block 17 , house number one . "
you say , " ok , but walking around the neighborhood , i noticed that the house numbers do n't go in order . "
he says , " of course they do . they go in the order in which they were built .
the first house ever built on a block is house number one .
the second house ever built is house number two .
third is house number three . it 's easy . it 's obvious . "
so , i love that sometimes we need to go to the opposite side of the world to realize assumptions we did n't even know we had , and realize that the opposite of them may also be true .
so , for example , there are doctors in china who believe that it 's their job to keep you healthy .
so , any month you are healthy you pay them , and when you 're sick you do n't have to pay them because they failed at their job . they get rich when you 're healthy , not sick .
in most music , we think of the " one " as the downbeat , the beginning of the musical phrase : one , two , three , four .
but in west african music , the " one " is thought of as the end of the phrase , like the period at the end of a sentence .
so , you can hear it not just in the phrasing , but the way they count off their music :
two , three , four , one .
and this map is also accurate .
there 's a saying that whatever true thing you can say about india , the opposite is also true .
so , let 's never forget , whether at ted , or anywhere else , that whatever brilliant ideas you have or hear , that the opposite may also be true .
domo arigato gozaimashita .
