i 'm going to take you on a journey very quickly .
to explain the wish , i 'm going to have to take you somewhere which many people have n't been , and that 's around the world .
when i was about 24 years old , kate store and myself started an organization to get architects and designers involved in humanitarian work .
not only about responding to natural disasters , but involved in systemic issues .
we believed that where the resources and expertise are scarce , innovative , sustainable design can really make a difference in people 's lives .
so i started my life as an architect , or training as an architect , and i was always interested in socially responsible design , and how you can really make an impact .
but when i went to architectural school , it seemed that i was the black sheep in the family .
many architects seemed to think that when you design , you design a jewel , and it 's a jewel that you try and crave for .
whereas i felt that when you design , you either improve or you create a detriment to the community in which you 're designing in .
so you 're not just doing a building for the residents or for the people who are going to use it , but for the community as a whole .
and in 1999 , we started by responding to the issue of the housing crisis for returning refugees in kosovo and i did n't know what i was doing ; like i say , mid - 20s , and i 'm the , i 'm the internet generation , so we started a website .
we put a call out there , and to my surprise in a couple of months we had hundreds of entries from around the world .
that led to a number of prototypes being built and really experimenting with some ideas .
two years later we started doing a project on developing mobile health clinics in sub - saharan africa , responding to the hiv / aids pandemic .
that led to 550 entries from 53 countries .
we also have designers from around the world that participate .
and we had an exhibit of work that followed that .
2004 was the tipping point for us .
we started responding to natural disasters and getting involved in iran and bam , also following up on our work in africa .
working within the united states , most people look at poverty and they see the face of a foreigner , but go live -- i live in bozeman , montana -- go up to the north plains on the reservations , or go down to alabama or mississippi pre - katrina , and i could have shown you places that have far worse conditions than many developing countries i 've been to .
so we got involved in and worked in inner cities and elsewhere .
and then also i will go into some more projects .
2005 mother nature kicked our arse .
i think we can pretty much assume that 2005 was a horrific year when it comes to natural disasters .
and because of the internet , and because of connections to blogs and so forth , within literally hours of the tsunami , we were already raising funds , getting involved , working with people on the ground .
we run from a couple of laptops in the first couple of days , i had 4,000 emails from people needing help .
so we began to get involved in projects there , and i 'll talk about some others .
and then of course , this year we 've been responding to katrina , as well as following up on our reconstruction works .
so this is a brief overview .
in 2004 , i really could n't manage the number of people who wanted to help , or the number of requests that i was getting .
it was all coming into my laptop and cell phone .
so we decided to embrace an open source model of business -- that anyone , anywhere in the world , could start a local chapter , and they can get involved in local problems .
because i believe there is no such thing as utopia .
all problems are local . all solutions are local .
so , and that means , you know , somebody who is based in mississippi knows more about mississippi than i do . so what happened is , we used meetup and all these other kind of internet tools , and we ended up having 40 chapters starting up , thousands of architects in 104 countries .
so the bullet point -- sorry , i never do a suit , so i knew that i was going to take this off .
ok , because i 'm going to do it very quick .
so in the past seven years -- this is n't just about nonprofit .
what it showed me is that there 's a grassroots movement going on of socially responsible designers who really believe that this world has got a lot smaller , and that we have the opportunity -- not the responsibility , but the opportunity -- to really get involved in making change .
i 'm adding that to my time .
so what you do n't know is , we 've got these thousands of designers working around the world , connected basically by a website , and we have a staff of three .
by doing something , the fact that nobody told us we could n't do it , we did it . and so there 's something to be said about naivete .
so seven years later , we 've developed so that we 've got advocacy , instigation and implementation . we advocate for good design , not only through student workshops and lectures and public forums , op - eds ; we have a book on humanitarian work ; but also disaster mitigation and dealing with public policy .
we can talk about fema , but that 's another talk .
instigation , developing ideas with communities and ngos doing open - source design competitions .
referring , matchmaking with communities and then implementing -- actually going out there and doing the work , because when you invent , it 's never a reality until it 's built .
so it 's really important that if we 're designing and trying to create change , we build that change .
so here 's a select number of projects .
kosovo . this is kosovo in '99 . we did an open design competition , like i said . it led to a whole variety of ideas , and this was n't about emergency shelter , but transitional shelter that would last five to 10 years , that would be placed next to the land the resident lived in , and that they would rebuild their own home .
this was n't imposing an architecture on a community ; this was giving them the tools and , and the space to allow them to rebuild and regrow the way they want to .
we have from the sublime to the ridiculous , but they worked .
this is an inflatable hemp house . it was built ; it works .
this is a shipping container . built and works .
and a whole variety of ideas that not only dealt with architectural building , but also the issues of governance and the idea of creating communities through complex networks .
so we 've engaged not just designers , but also , you know , a whole variety of technology - based professionals .
using rubble from destroyed homes to create new homes .
using straw bale construction , creating heat walls .
and then something remarkable happened in '99 .
we went to africa , originally to look at the housing issue .
within three days , we realized the problem was not housing ; it was the growing pandemic of hiv / aids .
and it was n't doctors telling us this ; it was actual villagers that we were staying with .
and so we came up with the bright idea that instead of getting people to walk 10 , 15 kilometers to see doctors , you get the doctors to the people .
and we started engaging the medical community .
and i thought , you know , we thought we were real bright , you know , sparks -- we 've come up with this great idea , mobile health clinics widely distributed throughout sub - saharan africa .
and the community , the medical community there said , " we 've said this for the last decade . we know this .
we just do n't know how to show this . "
so in a way , we had taken a pre - existing need and shown solutions .
and so again , we had a whole variety of ideas that came in .
this one i personally love , because the idea that architecture is not just about solutions , but about raising awareness .
this is a kenaf clinic . you get seed and you grow it in a plot of land , and then once -- and it grows 14 feet in a month .
and on the fourth week , the doctors come and they mow out an area , put a tensile structure on the top and when the doctors have finished treating and seeing patients and villagers , you cut down the clinic and you eat it . it 's an eat your own clinic .
so it 's dealing with the fact that if you have aids , you also need to have nutrition rates , and the idea that the idea of nutrition is as important as getting anti - retrovirals out there .
so you know , this is a serious solution .
this one i love . the idea is it 's not just a clinic -- it 's a community center .
this looked at setting up trade routes and economic engines within the community , so it can be a self - sustaining project .
every one of these projects is sustainable .
that 's not because i 'm a tree - hugging green person .
it 's because when you live on four dollars a day , you 're living on survival and you have to be sustainable .
you have to know where your energy is coming from .
you have to know where your resource is coming from .
and you have to keep the maintenance down .
so this is about getting an economic engine , and then at night it turns into a movie theater .
so it 's not an aids clinic . it 's a community center .
so you can see ideas . and these ideas developed into prototypes , and they were eventually built . and currently , as of this year , there are clinics rolling out in nigeria and kenya .
from that we also developed siyathemba , which was a project -- the community came to us and said , the problem is that the girls do n't have education .
and we 're working in an area where young women between the ages of 16 and 24 have a 50 percent hiv / aids rate .
and that 's not because they 're promiscuous , it 's because there 's no knowledge .
and so we decided to look at the idea of sports and create a youth sports center that doubled as an hiv / aids outreach center , and the coaches of the girls ' team were also trained doctors .
so that there would be a very slow way of developing kind of confidence in health care .
and we picked nine finalists , and then those nine finalists were distributed throughout the entire region , and then the community picked their design .
they said , this is our design , because it 's not only about engaging a community ; it 's about empowering a community and about getting them to be a part of the rebuilding process .
so the winning design is here , and then of course , we actually go and work with the community and the clients .
so this is the designer . he 's out there working with the first ever women 's soccer team in kwa - zulu natal , siyathemba , and they can tell it better .
video : well , my name is sisi , because i work at the african center .
i 'm a consultant and i 'm also the national football player for south africa , bafana bafana , and i also play in the vodacom league for the team called tembisa , which has now changed to siyathemba .
this is our home ground .
cameron sinclair : so i 'm going to show that later because i 'm running out of time .
i can see chris looking at me slyly .
this was a connection , just a meeting with somebody who wanted to develop africa 's first telemedicine center , in tanzania .
and we met , literally , a couple of months ago . we 've already developed a design , and the team is over there , working in partnership .
this was a matchmaking thanks to a couple of tedsters : [ unclear ] cheryl heller and andrew zolli , who connected me with this amazing african woman .
and we start construction in june , and it will be opened by tedglobal .
so when you come to tedglobal , you can check it out .
but what we 're known probably most for is dealing with disasters and development , and we 've been involved in a lot of issues , such as the tsunami and also things like hurricane katrina .
this is a 370 - dollar shelter that can be easily assembled .
this is a community - designed community center .
and what that means is we actually live and work with the community , and they 're part of the design process .
the kids actually get involved in mapping out where the community center should be , and then eventually , the community is actually , through skills training , end up building the building with us .
here is another school .
this is what the u.n. gave these guys for six months -- 12 plastic tarps .
this was in august . this was the replacement , and it 's supposed to last for two years .
when the rain comes down , you ca n't hear a thing , and in the summer it 's about 140 degrees inside .
so we said , if the rain 's coming down , let 's get fresh water .
so every one of our schools have rain water collection systems , very low cost .
a class , three classrooms and rainwater collection is 5,000 dollars .
this was raised by hot chocolate sales in atlanta .
it 's built by the parents of the kids .
the kids are out there on - site , building the buildings .
and it opened a couple of weeks ago , and there 's 600 kids that are now using the schools .
so , disaster hits home .
we see the bad stories on cnn and fox and all that , but we do n't see the good stories .
here is a community that got together and they said no to waiting .
they formed a partnership , a diverse partnership of players to actually map out east biloxi , to figure out who is getting involved .
we 've had over 1,500 volunteers rebuilding , rehabbing homes .
figuring out what fema regulations are , not waiting for them to dictate to us how you should rebuild .
working with residents , getting them out of their homes , so they do n't get ill. this is what they 're cleaning up on their own .
designing housing . this house is going to go in in a couple of weeks .
this is a rehabbed home , done in four days .
this is a utility room for a woman who is on a walker .
she 's 70 years old . this is what fema gave her .
600 bucks , happened two days ago .
we put together very quickly a washroom .
it 's built ; it 's running and she just started a business today , where she 's washing other peoples clothes .
this is shandra and the calhouns . they 're photographers who have documented the lower ninth for the last 40 years .
that was their home , and these are the photographs they took .
and we 're helping , working with them to create a new building .
projects we 've done . projects we 've been a part of , support .
why do n't aid agencies do this ? this is the u.n. tent .
this is the new u.n. tent , just introduced this year .
quick to assemble . it 's got a flap , that 's the invention .
it took 20 years to design this and get it implemented in the field .
i was 12 years old . there 's a problem here .
luckily , we 're not alone .
there are hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of architects and designers and inventors around the world that are getting involved in humanitarian work .
more hemp houses -- it 's a theme in japan apparently .
i 'm not sure what they 're smoking .
this is a grip clip designed by somebody who said , all you need is some way to attach membrane structures to physical support beams .
this guy designed for nasa , is now doing housing .
i 'm going to whip through this quickly , because i know i 've got only a couple of minutes .
so this is all done in the last two years .
i showed you something that took 20 years to do .
and this is just a selection of things that were built in the last couple of years .
from brazil to india , mexico , alabama , china , israel , palestine , vietnam .
the average age of a designer who gets involved in this project is 32 -- that 's how old i am. so it 's a young -- i just have to stop here , because arup is in the room and this is the best - designed toilet in the world .
if you 're ever , ever in india , go use this toilet .
chris luebkeman will tell you why .
i 'm sure that 's how he wanted to spend the party .
but the future is not going to be the sky - scraping cities of new york , but this . and when you look at this , you see crisis .
what i see is many , many inventors .
one billion people live in abject poverty .
we hear about them all the time .
four billion live in growing but fragile economies .
one in seven live in unplanned settlements .
if we do nothing about the housing crisis that 's about to happen , in 20 years , one in three people will live in an unplanned settlement or a refugee camp . look left , look right : one of you will be there .
how do we improve the living standards of five billion people ?
with 10 million solutions .
so i wish to develop a community that actively embraces innovative and sustainable design to improve the living conditions for everyone .
chris anderson : wait a second . wait a second . that 's your wish ?
cs : that 's my wish .
ca : that 's his wish !
cs : we started architecture for humanity with 700 dollars and a website .
so chris somehow decided to give me 100,000 .
so why not this many people ?
open - source architecture is the way to go .
you have a diverse community of participants -- and we 're not just talking about inventors and designers , but we 're talking about the funding model .
my role is not as a designer ; it 's as a conduit between the design world and the humanitarian world .
and what we need is something that replicates me globally , because i have n't slept in seven years .
secondly , what will this thing be ?
designers want to respond to issues of humanitarian crisis , but they do n't want some company in the west taking their idea and basically profiting from it .
so creative commons has developed the developing nations license .
and what that means is that a designer can -- the siyathemba project i showed was the first ever building to have a creative commons license on it .
as soon as that is built , anyone in africa or any developing nation can take the construction documents and replicate it for free .
so why not allow designers the opportunity to do this , but still protecting their rights here ?
we want to have a community where you can upload ideas , and those ideas can be tested in earthquake , in flood , in all sorts of austere environments . the reason that 's important is i do n't want to wait for the next katrina to find out if my house works .
that 's too late . we need to do it now .
so doing that globally .
and i want this whole thing to work multi - lingually .
when you look at the face of an architect , most people think a gray - haired white guy .
i do n't see that . i see the face of the world .
so i want everyone from all over the planet , to be able to be a part of this design and development .
the idea of needs - based competitions -- x - prize for the other 98 percent , if you want to call it that .
we also want to look at ways of matchmaking and putting funding partners together .
and the idea of integrating manufacturers -- fab labs in every country .
when i hear about the $ 100 laptop and it 's going to educate every child -- educate every designer in the world . put one in every favela , every slum settlement , because you know what , innovation will happen .
and i need to know that . it 's called the leap - back .
we talk about leapfrog technologies . i write with worldchanging , and the one thing we 've been talking about is , i learn more on the ground than i 've ever learned here .
so let 's take those ideas , adapt them and we can use them .
these ideas are supposed to have adaptable ; they should have the potential for evolution ; they should be developed by every nation on the world and useful for every nation on the world . what will it take ?
there should be a sheet . i do n't have time to read this , because i 'm going to be yanked off .
ca : just leave it up there for a sec .
cs : well , what will it take ? you guys are smart .
so it 's going to take a lot of computing power , because i want the idea that any laptop anywhere in the world can plug into the system and be able to not only participate in developing these designs , but utilize the designs . also , a process of reviewing the designs .
i want every arup engineer in the world to check and make sure that we 're doing stuff that 's standing , because those guys are the best in the world . plug .
and so you know , i want these -- and i just should note , i have two laptops and one of them there , is there and that has 3000 designs on it . if i drop that laptop , what happens ?
so it 's important to have these proven ideas put up there , easy to use , easy to get a hold of .
my mom once said , there 's nothing worse than being all mouth and no trousers .
i 'm fed up of talking about making change .
you only make it by doing it .
we 've changed fema guidelines . we 've changed public policy .
we 've changed international response -- based on building things .
so for me , it 's important that we create a real conduit for innovation , and that it 's free innovation .
think of free culture -- this is free innovation .
somebody said this a couple of years back .
i will give points for those who know it .
i think the man was maybe 25 years too early , so let 's do it .
thank you .
