i told you three things last year .
i told you that the statistics of the world have not been made properly available .
because of that , we still have the old mindset of developing in industrialized countries , which is wrong .
and that animated graphics can make a difference .
things are changing
and today , on the united nations statistic division home page , it says , by first of may , full access to the databases .
and if i could share the image with you on the screen .
so three things have happened .
u.n. opened their statistic databases , and we have a new version of the software up working as a beta on the net , so you do n't have to download it any longer . and let me repeat what you saw last year .
the bubbles are the countries .
here you have the fertility rate -- the number of children per woman -- and there you have the length of life in years .
this is 1950 -- those were the industrialized countries , those were developing countries .
at that time there was a " we " and " them . "
there was a huge difference in the world .
but then it changed , and it went on quite well .
and this is what happens .
you can see how china is the red , big bubble . the blue there is india .
a little more serious this year in showing you how things really changed .
and it 's africa that stands out as the problem down here , does n't it ?
large families still , and the hiv epidemic brought down the countries like this .
this is more or less what we saw last year , and this is how it will go on into the future .
and i will talk on , is this possible ?
because you see now , i presented statistics that do n't exist .
because this is where we are .
will it be possible that this will happen ?
i cover my lifetime here , you know ?
i expect to live 100 years .
and this is where we are today .
now could we look here instead at the economic situation in the world ?
and i would like to show that against child survival .
we 'll swap the axis . here you have child mortality -- that is , survival -- four kids dying there , 200 dying there .
and this is gdp per capita on this axis .
and this was 2007 .
and if i go back in time , i 've added some historical statistics -- here we go , here we go , here we go -- not so much statistics 100 years ago .
some countries still had statistics .
we are looking down in the archive , and when we are down into 1820 , there is only austria and sweden that can produce numbers .
but they were down here . they had 1,000 dollars per person per year .
and they lost one - fifth of their kids before their first birthday .
so this is what happens in the world , if we play the entire world . how they got slowly richer and richer , and they add statistics .
is n't it beautiful when they get statistics ?
you see the importance of that ?
and here , children do n't live longer .
the last century , 1870 , was bad for the kids in europe , because most of this statistics is europe .
it was only by the turn of the century that more than 90 percent of the children survived their first year .
this is india coming up , with the first data from india .
and this is the united states moving away here , earning more money .
and we will soon see china coming up in the very far end corner here .
and it moves up with mao tse - tung getting health , not getting so rich .
there he died , then deng xiaoping brings money . it moves this way over here .
and the bubbles keep moving up there , and this is what the world looks like today .
let us have a look at the united states .
we have a function here -- i can tell the world , " stay where you are . " and i take the united states -- we still want to see the background -- i put them up like this , and now we go backwards .
and we can see that the united states goes to the right of the mainstream .
they are on the money side all the time .
and down in 1915 , the united states was a neighbor of india -- present , contemporary india .
and that means united states was richer , but lost more kids than india is doing today , proportionally .
and look here -- compare to the philippines of today .
the philippines of today has almost the same economy as the united states during the first world war .
but we have to bring united states forward quite a while to find the same health of the united states as we have in the philippines .
about 1957 here , the health of the united states is the same as the philippines .
and this is the drama of this world which many call globalized , is that asia , arabic countries , latin america , are much more ahead in being healthy , educated , having human resources than they are economically .
there 's a discrepancy in what 's happening today in the emerging economies .
there now , social benefits , social progress , are going ahead of economical progress .
and 1957 -- the united states had the same economy as chile has today .
and how long do we have to bring united states to get the same health as chile has today ?
i think we have to go , there -- we have 2001 , or 2002 -- the united states has the same health as chile .
chile 's catching up !
within some years chile may have better child survival than the united states .
this is really a change , that you have this lag of more or less 30 , 40 years ' difference on the health .
and behind the health is the educational level .
and there 's a lot of infrastructure things , and general human resources are there .
now we can take away this -- and i would like to show you the rate of speed , the rate of change , how fast they have gone .
and we go back to 1920 , and i want to look at japan .
and i want to look at sweden and the united states .
and i 'm going to stage a race here between this sort of yellowish ford here and the red toyota down there , and the brownish volvo . and here we go . here we go .
the toyota has a very bad start down here , you can see , and the united states ford is going off - road there .
and the volvo is doing quite fine .
this is the war . the toyota got off track , and now the toyota is coming on the healthier side of sweden -- can you see that ?
and they are taking over sweden , and they are now healthier than sweden .
that 's the part where i sold the volvo and bought the toyota .
and now we can see that the rate of change was enormous in japan .
they really caught up .
and this changes gradually .
we have to look over generations to understand it .
and let me show you my own sort of family history -- we made these graphs here .
and this is the same thing , money down there , and health , you know ?
and this is my family .
this is sweden , 1830 , when my great - great - grandma was born .
sweden was like sierra leone today .
and this is when great - grandma was born , 1863 .
and sweden was like mozambique .
and this is when my grandma was born , 1891 .
she took care of me as a child , so i 'm not talking about statistic now -- now it 's oral history in my family .
that 's when i believe statistics , when it 's grandma - verified statistics .
i think it 's the best way of verifying historical statistics .
sweden was like ghana .
it 's interesting to see the enormous diversity within sub - saharan africa .
i told you last year , i 'll tell you again , my mother was born in egypt , and i -- who am i ?
i 'm the mexican in the family .
and my daughter , she was born in chile , and the grand - daughter was born in singapore , now the healthiest country on this earth .
it bypassed sweden about two to three years ago , with better child survival .
but they 're very small , you know ?
they 're so close to the hospital we can never beat them out in these forests .
but homage to singapore .
singapore is the best one .
now this looks also like a very good story .
but it 's not really that easy , that it 's all a good story .
because i have to show you one of the other facilities .
we can also make the color here represent the variable -- and what am i choosing here ?
carbon - dioxide emission , metric ton per capita .
this is 1962 , and united states was emitting 16 tons per person .
and china was emitting 0.6 , and india was emitting 0.32 tons per capita .
and what happens when we moved on ?
well , you see the nice story of getting richer and getting healthier --
everyone did it at the cost of emission of carbon dioxide .
there is no one who has done it so far .
and we do n't have all the updated data any longer , because this is really hot data today .
and there we are , 2001 .
and in the discussion i attended with global leaders , you know , many say now the problem is that the emerging economies , they are getting out too much carbon dioxide .
the minister of the environment of india said , " well , you were the one who caused the problem . "
the oecd countries -- the high - income countries -- they were the ones who caused the climate change .
" but we forgive you , because you did n't know it .
but from now on , we count per capita .
from now on we count per capita .
and everyone is responsible for the per capita emission . " this really shows you , we have not seen good economic and health progress anywhere in the world without destroying the climate .
and this is really what has to be changed .
i 've been criticized for showing you a too positive image of the world , but i do n't think it 's like this .
the world is quite a messy place .
this we can call dollar street .
everyone lives on this street here .
what they earn here -- what number they live on -- is how much they earn per day .
this family earns about one dollar per day .
we drive up the street here , we find a family here which earns about two to three dollars a day .
and we drive away here -- we find the first garden in the street , and they earn 10 to 50 dollars a day .
and how do they live ?
if we look at the bed here , we can see that they sleep on a rug on the floor .
this is what poverty line is -- 80 percent of the family income is just to cover the energy needs , the food for the day .
this is two to five dollars . you have a bed .
and here it 's a much nicer bedroom , you can see .
i lectured on this for ikea , and they wanted to see the sofa immediately here .
and this is the sofa , how it will emerge from there .
and the interesting thing , when you go around here in the photo panorama , you see the family still sitting on the floor there . although there is a sofa ,
if you watch in the kitchen , you can see that the great difference for women does not come between one to 10 dollars .
it comes beyond here , when you really can get good working conditions in the family .
and if you really want to see the difference , you look at the toilet over here .
this can change . this can change .
these are all pictures and images from africa , and it can become much better .
we can get out of poverty .
my own research has not been in it or anything like this .
i spent 20 years in interviews with african farmers who were on the verge of famine .
and this is the result of the farmers - needs research .
the nice thing here is that you ca n't see who are the researchers in this picture .
that 's when research functions in poor societies -- you must really live with the people .
when you 're in poverty , everything is about survival .
it 's about having food .
and these two young farmers , they are girls now -- because the parents are dead from hiv and aids -- they discuss with a trained agronomist .
this is one of the best agronomists in malawi , junatambe kumbira , and he 's discussing what sort of cassava they will plant -- the best converter of sunshine to food that man has found .
and they are very , very eagerly interested to get advice , and that 's to survive in poverty .
that 's one context .
getting out of poverty .
the women told us one thing . " get us technology .
we hate this mortar , to stand hours and hours .
get us a mill so that we can mill our flour , then we will be able to pay for the rest ourselves . " technology will bring you out of poverty , but there 's a need for a market to get away from poverty .
and this woman is very happy now , bringing her products to the market .
but she 's very thankful for the public investment in schooling so she can count , and wo n't be cheated when she reaches the market .
she wants her kid to be healthy , so she can go to the market and does n't have to stay home .
and she wants the infrastructure -- it is nice with a paved road .
it 's also good with credit .
micro - credits gave her the bicycle , you know .
and information will tell her when to go to market with which product .
you can do this .
i find my experience from 20 years of africa is that the seemingly impossible is possible .
africa has not done bad .
in 50 years they 've gone from a pre - medieval situation to a very decent 100 - year - ago europe , with a functioning nation and state .
i would say that sub - saharan africa has done best in the world during the last 50 years .
because we do n't consider where they came from .
it 's this stupid concept of developing countries that puts us , argentina and mozambique together 50 years ago , and says that mozambique did worse .
we have to know a little more about the world .
i have a neighbor who knows 200 types of wine .
he knows everything .
he knows the name of the grape , the temperature and everything .
i only know two types of wine -- red and white .
but my neighbor only knows two types of countries -- industrialized and developing .
and i know 200 , i know about the small data .
but you can do that .
but i have to get serious . and how do you get serious ?
you make a powerpoint , you know ?
homage to the office package , no ?
what is this , what is this , what am i telling ?
i 'm telling you that there are many dimensions of development .
everyone wants your pet thing .
if you are in the corporate sector , you love micro - credit .
if you are fighting in a non - governmental organization , you love equity between gender .
or if you are a teacher , you 'll love unesco , and so on .
on the global level , we have to have more than our own thing .
we need everything .
all these things are important for development , especially when you just get out of poverty and you should go towards welfare .
now , what we need to think about is , what is a goal for development , and what are the means for development ?
let me first grade what are the most important means .
economic growth to me , as a public - health professor , is the most important thing for development because it explains 80 percent of survival .
governance . to have a government which functions -- that 's what brought california out of the misery of 1850 .
it was the government that made law function finally .
education , human resources are important .
health is also important , but not that much as a mean .
environment is important .
human rights is also important , but it just gets one cross .
now what about goals ? where are we going toward ?
we are not interested in money .
money is not a goal .
it 's the best mean , but i give it zero as a goal .
governance , well it 's fun to vote in a little thing , but it 's not a goal .
and going to school , that 's not a goal , it 's a mean .
health i give two points . i mean it 's nice to be healthy -- at my age especially -- you can stand here , you 're healthy .
and that 's good , it gets two plusses .
environment is very , very crucial .
there 's nothing for the grandkid if you do n't save up .
but where are the important goals ?
of course , it 's human rights .
human rights is the goal , but it 's not that strong of a mean for achieving development .
and culture . culture is the most important thing , i would say , because that 's what brings joy to life .
that 's the value of living .
so the seemingly impossible is possible .
even african countries can achieve this .
and i 've shown you the shot where the seemingly impossible is possible .
and remember , please remember my main message , which is this : the seemingly impossible is possible .
we can have a good world .
i showed you the shots , i proved it in the powerpoint , and i think i will convince you also by culture .
bring me my sword !
sword swallowing is from ancient india .
it 's a cultural expression that for thousands of years has inspired human beings to think beyond the obvious .
and i will now prove to you that the seemingly impossible is possible by taking this piece of steel -- solid steel -- this is the army bayonet from the swedish army , 1850 , in the last year we had war .
and it 's all solid steel -- you can hear here .
and i 'm going to take this blade of steel , and push it down through my body of blood and flesh , and prove to you that the seemingly impossible is possible .
can i request a moment of absolute silence ?
