as a boy , i loved cars .
when i turned 18 , i lost my best friend to a car accident .
like this .
and then i decided i 'd dedicate my life to saving one million people every year .
now i have n't succeeded , so this is just a progress report , but i 'm here to tell you a little bit about self - driving cars .
i saw the concept first in the darpa grand challenges where the u.s. government issued a prize to build a self - driving car that could navigate a desert .
and even though a hundred teams were there , these cars went nowhere .
so we decided at stanford to build a different self - driving car .
we built the hardware and the software .
we made it learn from us , and we set it free in the desert .
and the unimaginable happened : it became the first car to ever return from a darpa grand challenge , winning stanford 2 million dollars .
yet i still had n't saved a single life .
since , our work has focused on building driving cars that can drive anywhere by themselves -- any street in california .
we 've driven 140,000 miles .
our cars have sensors by which they magically can see everything around them and make decisions about every aspect of driving .
it 's the perfect driving mechanism .
we 've driven in cities , like in san francisco here .
we 've driven from san francisco to los angeles on highway 1 .
we 've encountered joggers , busy highways , toll booths , and this is without a person in the loop ; the car just drives itself .
in fact , while we drove 140,000 miles , people did n't even notice .
mountain roads , day and night , and even crooked lombard street in san francisco .
sometimes our cars get so crazy , they even do little stunts .
man : oh , my god .
what ?
second man : it 's driving itself .
sebastian thrun : now i ca n't get my friend harold back to life , but i can do something for all the people who died .
do you know that driving accidents are the number one cause of death for young people ?
and do you realize that almost all of those are due to human error and not machine error , and can therefore be prevented by machines ?
do you realize that we could change the capacity of highways by a factor of two or three if we did n't rely on human precision on staying in the lane -- improve body position and therefore drive a little bit closer together on a little bit narrower lanes , and do away with all traffic jams on highways ?
do you realize that you , ted users , spend an average of 52 minutes per day in traffic , wasting your time on your daily commute ?
you could regain this time .
this is four billion hours wasted in this country alone .
and it 's 2.4 billion gallons of gasoline wasted .
now i think there 's a vision here , a new technology , and i 'm really looking forward to a time when generations after us look back at us and say how ridiculous it was that humans were driving cars .
thank you .
