i had requested slides , kind of adamantly , up till the -- pretty much , last few days , but was denied access to a slide projector .
i actually find them a lot more emotional -- -- and personal , and the neat thing about a slide projector is you can actually focus the work , unlike powerpoint and some other programs .
now , i agree that you have to -- yeah , there are certain concessions and , you know , if you use a slide projector , you 're not able to have the bad type swing in from the back or the side , or up or down , but maybe that 's an o.k. trade - off , to trade that off for a focus .
it 's a thought . just a thought .
and there 's something nice about slides getting stuck .
and the thing you really hope for is occasionally they burn up , which we wo n't see tonight . so .
with that , let 's get the first slide up here .
this , as many of you have probably guessed , is a recently emptied beer can in portugal .
this -- i had just arrived in barcelona for the first time , and i thought -- you know , fly all night , i looked up , and i thought , wow , how clean .
you come into this major airport , and they simply have a b.
i mean , how nice is that ?
everything 's gotten simpler in design , and here 's this mega airport , and god , i just -- i took a picture .
i thought , god , that is the coolest thing i 've ever seen at an airport .
till a couple months later , i went back to the same airport -- same plane , i think -- and looked up , and it said c.
it was only then that i realized it was simply a gate that i was coming into .
i 'm a big believer in the emotion of design , and the message that 's sent before somebody begins to read , before they get the rest of the information ; what is the emotional response they get to the product , to the story , to the painting -- whatever it is .
that area of design interests me the most , and i think this for me is a real clear , very simplified version of what i 'm talking about .
these are a couple of garage doors painted identical , situated next to each other .
so , here 's the first door . you know , you get the message .
you know , it 's pretty clear .
take a look at the second door and see if there 's any different message .
o.k. , which one would you park in front of ?
same color , same message , same words .
the only thing that 's different is the expression that the individual door - owner here put into the piece -- and , again , which is the psycho - killer here ?
yet it does n't say that ; it does n't need to say that .
i would probably park in front of the other one .
i 'm sure a lot of you are aware that graphic design has gotten a lot simpler in the last five years or so .
it 's gotten so simple that it 's already starting to kind of come back the other way again and get a little more expressive .
but i was in milan and saw this street sign , and was very happy to see that apparently this idea of minimalism has even been translated by the graffiti artist .
and this graffiti artist has come along , made this sign a little bit better , and then moved on .
he did n't overpower it like they have a tendency to do .
this is for a book by " metropolis . "
i took some photos , and this is a billboard in florida , and either they had n't paid their rent , or they did n't want to pay their rent again on the sign , and the billboard people were too cheap to tear the whole sign down , so they just teared out sections of it .
and i would argue that it 's possibly more effective than the original billboard in terms of getting your attention , getting you to look over that way .
and hopefully you do n't stop and buy those awful pecan things -- stuckey 's .
this is from my second book .
the first book is called , " the end of print , " and it was done along with a film , working with william burroughs .
and " the end of print " is now in its fifth printing .
when i first contacted william burroughs about being part of it , he said no ; he said he did n't believe it was the end of print .
and i said , well , that 's fine ; i just would love to have your input on this film and this book , and he finally agreed to it .
and at the end of the film , he says in this great voice that i ca n't mimic but i 'll kind of try , but not really , he says , " i remember attending an exhibition called , ' photography : the end of painting . ' " and then he says , " and , of course , it was n't at all . "
so , apparently when photography was perfected , there were people going around saying , that 's it : you 've just ruined painting .
people are just going to take pictures now .
and of course , that was n't the case .
so , this is from " 2nd sight , " a book i did on intuition .
i think it 's not the only ingredient in design , but possibly the most important .
it 's something everybody has .
it 's not a matter of teaching it ; in fact , most of the schools tend to discount intuition as an ingredient of your working process because they ca n't quantify it : it 's very hard to teach people the four steps to intuitive design , but we can teach you the four steps to a nice business card or a newsletter .
so it tends to get discounted .
this is a quote from albert einstein , who says , " the intellect has little to do on the road to discovery .
there comes a leap in consciousness -- call it intuition or what you will -- and the solution just comes to you , and you do n't know from where or why . "
so , it 's kind of like when somebody says , who did that song ?
and the more you try to think about it , the further the answer gets from you , and the minute you stop thinking about it , your intuition gives you that answer , in a sense .
i like this for a couple of reasons .
if you 've had any design courses , they would teach you you ca n't read this .
i think you eventually can and , more importantly , i think it 's true .
" do n't mistake legibility for communication . "
just because something 's legible does n't means it communicates .
more importantly , it does n't mean it communicates the right thing .
so , what is the message sent before somebody actually gets into the material ?
and i think that 's sometimes an overlooked area .
this is working with marshall mcluhan .
i stayed and worked with his wife and son , eric , and we came up with close to 600 quotes from marshall that are just amazing in terms of being ahead of the times , predicting so much of what has happened in the advertising , television , media world .
and so this book is called " probes . " it 's another word for quotes .
and it 's -- a lot of them are never -- have never been published before , and basically , i 've interpreted the different quotes .
so , this was the contents page originally .
when i got done it was 540 pages , and then the publisher , gingko press , ended up cutting it down considerably : it 's just under 400 pages now .
but i decided i liked this contents page -- i liked the way it looks -- so i kept it .
it now has no relevance to the book whatsoever , but it 's a nice spread , i think , in there .
so , a couple spreads from the book : here mcluhan says , " the new media are not bridges between man and nature ; they are nature . "
" the invention of printing did away with anonymity , fostering ideas of literary fame and the habit of considering intellectual effort as private property , " which had never been done before printing .
" when new technologies impose themselves on societies long habituated to older technologies , anxieties of all kinds result . "
" while people are engaged in creating a totally different world , they always form vivid images of the preceding world . "
i hate this stuff . it 's hard to read .
" people in the electronic age have no possible environment except the globe , and no possible occupation except information gathering . "
that was it . that 's all he saw as the options . and not too far off .
so , this is a project for nine inch nails .
and i only show it because it seemed like it got all this relevancy all of a sudden , and it was done right after 9/11 .
and i had recently discovered a bomb shelter in the backyard of a house i had bought in la that the real estate person had n't pointed out .
there was some bomb shelter built , apparently in the '60s cuban missile crisis .
and i asked the real estate guy what it was as we were walking by , and he goes , " it 's something to do with the sewage system . "
i was , o.k. ; that 's fine .
i finally went down there , and it was this old rusted circular thing , and two beds , and very kind of creepy and weird .
and also , surprisingly , it was done in kind of a cheap metal , and it had completely rusted through , and water everywhere , and spiders .
and i thought , you know , what were they thinking ?
you 'd think maybe cement , possibly , or something .
but anyway , i used this for a cover for the nine inch nails dvd , and i 've also now fixed the bomb shelter with duct tape , and it 's ready . i think i 'm ready . so .
this is an experiment , really , for a client , quicksilver , where we were taking what was a six - shot sequence and trying to use print as a medium to get people to the web .
so , this is a six - shot sequence .
i 've taken one shot ; i cropped it a few different ways .
and then the tiny line of copy says , if you want to see this entire sequence -- how this whole ride was -- go to the website .
and my guess is that a lot of the surf kids did go to the site to get this entire picture .
got no way of tracking it , so i could be totally wrong .
i do n't have the site . it 's just the piece itself .
this is a group in new york called the coalition for a smoke - free environment -- asked me to do these posters .
they were wild - posted around new york city .
you ca n't really -- well , you ca n't see it at all -- but the second line is really the more kind of payoff , in a sense .
it says , " if the cigarette companies can lie , then so can we . " but -- -- but i did .
these were literally wild - posted all over new york one night , and there were definitely some heads turning , you know , people smoking and , " huh ! "
and it was purposely done to look fairly serious .
it was n't some , you know , weird grunge type or something ; it looked like they might be real . anyway .
poster for atlantic center for the arts , a school in florida .
this amazes me . this is a product i just found out .
i was in the caribbean at christmas , and i 'm just blown away that in this day and age they will still sell -- not that they will sell -- that there is felt a need for people to lighten the color of their skin .
this was either an old product with new packaging , or a brand - new package , and i just thought , yikes ! how 's that still happening ?
i do a lot of workshops all over the world , really , and this particular assignment was to come up with new symbols for the restroom doors .
i felt this was one of the more successful solutions .
the students actually cut them up and put them up around bars and restaurants that night , and i just always have this vision of this elderly couple going to use the restroom ...
i did some work for microsoft a few years back .
it was a worldwide branding campaign .
and it was interesting to me -- my background is in sociology ; i had no design training , and sometimes people say , well , that explains it -- but it was a very interesting experiment because there 's no product that i had to sell ; it was simply the image of microsoft they were trying to improve .
they thought some people did n't like them .
i found out that 's very true , working on this campaign worldwide .
and our goal was to try to humanize them a bit , and what i did was add type and people to the ad , which the previous campaign had not had , and nobody remembered them , and nobody referenced them .
and we were trying to say that , hey , some of these guys that work there are actually ok ; some of them actually have friends and family , and they 're not all awful people .
and the umbrella campaign was " thank god it 's monday . "
so , we tried to take this -- what was perceived as a negative : their over - competitiveness , their , you know , long working hours -- and turn it into a positive and not run from it .
you know : thank god it 's monday -- i get to go back to that little cubicle , those fake gray walls , and hear everybody else 's conversations f or 10 hours and then go home .
but anyway , this is one of the ads i was most pleased with , because they were all elaborately art - directed , and this one i thought actually felt like the girl was looking at the computer .
it says , " wonder around . " and then it 's a piece of the software .
and this is how the ad ran around the world .
in germany , they made one small change without checking with me -- nor did they have to , because it was done through agencies -- but see if you can tell the difference .
this is how the ad ran throughout the world ; germany made one slight change in the ad .
now , there 's kind of two issues here .
if you 're going to put a kid in the ad , pick one that looks alive .
i just have a feeling this kid 's been there for a week , you know .
he 's just really hoping that boots up and , you know ...
and then as the agency explained to me , they said , " look , we do n't have little green people in our country ; why would we put little green people in our ads , for instance ? "
so , i understand their logic . i totally disagree with it ; i think it 's a very small - minded approach , the world is certainly much more global , and i certainly think the people of germany could have handled a little black girl sitting in front of a computer , though we 'll never know .
this is some work from ray gun .
and the point of this magazine was to read the articles , listen to the music , and try to interpret it .
there 's no grid , there 's no system , there 's nothing set up in advance .
this is an opener for brian eno , and it 's just kind of my personal interpretation of the music .
this is rockstars talking about teachers they had lusted after in school .
there 's a lot of great writing in " ray gun . "
and i was fortunate to find a photograph of a teacher sitting on some books .
article on bryan ferry -- just really boring article -- so i set the whole article in dingbat .
you could -- you could highlight it ; you could make it helvetica or something : it is the actual article .
i suppose you could eventually decode it , but it 's really not very well written ; it really would n't be worthwhile .
having done a lot of magazines , i 'm very curious how big magazines handle big stories , and i was very curious to see how time and newsweek would handle 9/11 .
and i was basically pretty disappointed to see that they had chosen to show the photo we 'd already seen a million times , which was basically the moment of impact .
and people magazine , i thought , got probably the best shot .
it 's kind of horsey type , but the texture -- the second plane not quite hitting : there was something more enticing , if that 's the right -- it 's not the right word -- but in this cover than time or newsweek .
but when i got into this magazine , there 's something kind of disturbing , and this continued .
on the left we see people dying ; we see people running for their lives .
and on the right we learn that there 's a new way to support your breast .
the coveted right - hand page was not given up to the whole issue .
look at the image of this lady -- who knows what she 's going through ? -- and the copy says : " he knows just how to give me goosebumps . "
yeah , he jumps out of buildings . it 's -- unfortunately , this one works , kind of , as a spread .
and this continued through the entire magazine .
it did not let up .
this says : " one clean fits all . " .
there were a lot of orphans made this day , and here 's a dead body being brought out .
it just seems to me possibly even a blank page would have been more appropriate .
and this one i think is possibly the worst : two ladies , both facing the same way , both wearing jeans .
one -- who knows what she 's going through ; the other one is worried about model behavior and milk .
and -- i gave a talk in new york a couple months after this , and afterwards somebody came up to me and they said that -- they actually emailed me -- and they said that they appreciated the talk , and when they got back to their car , they found a note on their car that made them think maybe new york was getting back to being new york again after this event -- it had been a few months .
this was what they found on their car .
there 's very few times you 'd be happy to find this on your car , but it did seem to indicate that we were coming back .
this is my desktop .
somebody told me today there was this thing called folders , but i do n't know what they are .
these are my notes for the talk -- there might be a correlation here .
we are wrapping up .
this i saw on the plane , flying in , for hot new products .
i 'm not sure this is an improvement , or a good idea , because , like , if you do n't spend quite enough time in front of your computer , you can now get a plate in the keyboard , so there 's no more faking it -- that you do n't really sit at your desk all day and eat and work anyway .
now there 's a plate , and it would be really , really convenient to get a piece of pizza , then type a little bit , then ...
i 'm just not sure this is improvement .
if you ever doubt the power of graphic design , this is a very generic sign that literally says , " vote for hitler . " it says nothing else .
and this to me is an extreme case of the power of emotion , of graphic design , even though , in fact , was a very generic poster at the time .
what 's next ? what 's next is going to be people .
as we get more technically driven , the importance of people becomes more than it 's ever been before .
you have to utilize who you are in your work .
nobody else can do that : nobody else can pull from your background , from your parents , your upbringing , your whole life experience .
if you allow that to happen , it 's really the only way you can do some unique work , and you 're going to enjoy the work a lot more as well .
this is -- i like found art ; hand lettering 's coming back in a big way , and i thought this was a great example of both .
this lady 's advertising for her lost pit bull .
it 's friendly -- she 's underlined friendly -- that 's probably why she calls it hercules or hercles . she ca n't spell .
but more importantly , she 's willing to give you 20 bucks to go find this lost pit bull .
and i 'm thinking , yeah , right , i 'll go look for a lost pit bill for 20 bucks .
i have visions of people going down alleyways yelling out for hercles , and you get charged by this thing and you go , oh , please be hercles ; please be the friendly one .
i 'm sure she never found the dog , because i took the sign .
but i was asked to give a talk at a conference in sacramento a few years back .
and the theme was courage , and they asked me to talk about how courageous it is to be a graphic designer .
and i remembered seeing this photograph of my father , who was a test pilot , and he told me that when you signed up to become a test pilot , they told you that there was a 40 to 50 percent chance of death on the job .
that 's pretty high for most occupations .
but , you know , the government would make a plane ; they 'd say , go see if that one flies , would you ?
some of them did ; some of them did n't .
and i started thinking about some of these decisions i have to make between , like , serif versus san - serif .
and for the most part , they 're not real life - threatening .
why not experiment ? why not have some fun ?
why not put some of yourself into the work ?
and when i was teaching , i used to always ask the students , what 's the definition of a good job ?
and as teachers , after you get all the answers , you like to give them the correct answer .
and the best one i 've heard -- i 'm sure some of you have heard this -- the definition of a good job is : if you could afford to -- if money was n't an issue -- would you be doing that same work ?
and if you would , you 've got a great job .
and if you would n't , what the heck are you doing ?
you 're going to be dead a really long time .
thank you very much .
