the first half of the 20th century was an absolute disaster in human affairs , a cataclysm .
we had the first world war , the great depression , the second world war and the rise of the communist nations .
and each one of these forces split the world , tore the world apart , divided the world .
and they threw up walls -- political walls , trade walls , transportation walls , communication walls , iron curtains -- which divided peoples and nations .
it was only in the second half of the 20th century that we slowly began to pull ourselves out of this abyss .
trade walls began to come tumbling down .
here are some data on tariffs : starting at 40 percent , coming down to less than 5 percent .
we globalized the world . and what does that mean ?
it means that we extended cooperation across national boundaries ; we made the world more cooperative .
transportation walls came tumbling down .
you know in 1950 the typical ship carried 5,000 to 10,000 tons worth of goods .
today a container ship can carry 150,000 tons ; it can be manned with a smaller crew ; and unloaded faster than ever before .
communication walls , i do n't have to tell you -- the internet -- have come tumbling down .
and of course the iron curtains , political walls have come tumbling down .
now all of this has been tremendous for the world .
trade has increased .
here is just a little bit of data .
in 1990 , exports from china to the united states : 15 billion dollars .
by 2007 : over 300 billion dollars .
and perhaps most remarkably , at the beginning of the 21st century , really for the first time in modern history , growth extended to almost all parts of the world .
so china , i 've already mentioned , beginning around 1978 , around the time of the death of mao , growth -- ten percent a year .
year after year after year , absolutely incredible .
never before in human history have so many people been raised out of such great poverty as happened in china .
china is the world 's greatest anti - poverty program over the last three decades .
india , starting a little bit later , but in 1990 , begetting tremendous growth .
incomes at that time less than $ 1,000 per year .
and over the next 18 years have almost tripled .
growth of six percent a year . absolutely incredible .
now africa , sub - saharan africa -- sub - saharan africa has been the area of the world most resistant to growth .
and we can see the tragedy of africa in the first few bars here .
growth was negative .
people were actually getting poorer than their parents , and sometimes even poorer than their grandparents had been .
but at the end of the 20th century , the beginning of the 21st century , we saw growth in africa .
and i think , as you 'll see , there 's reasons for optimism , because i believe that the best is yet to come .
now why .
on the cutting edge today it 's new ideas which are driving growth .
and by that i mean it 's products for which the research and development costs are really high , and the manufacturing costs are low .
more than ever before it is these types of ideas which are driving growth on the cutting edge .
now ideas have this amazing property .
thomas jefferson , i think , really expressed this quite well .
he said , " he who receives an idea from me receives instruction himself , without lessening mine .
as he who lights his candle at mine receives light without darkening me .
or to put it slightly differently : one apple feeds one man , but an idea can feed the world . "
now this is not new . this is practically not new to tedsters .
this is practically the model of ted .
but what is new is that the greater function of ideas is going to drive growth even more than ever before .
this provides a reason why trade and globalization are even more important , more powerful than ever before , and are going to increase growth more than ever before .
and to explain why this is so , i have a question .
suppose that there are two diseases : one of them is rare , the other one is common , but if they are not treated they are equally severe .
if you had to choose , which would you rather have : the common disease or the rare disease ?
common , the common -- i think that 's absolutely right , and why ? because there are more drugs to treat common diseases than there are to treat rare diseases .
the reason for this is incentives .
it costs about the same to produce a new drug whether that drug treats 1,000 people , 100,000 people , or a million people .
but the revenues are much greater if the drug treats a million people .
so the incentives are much larger to produce drugs which treat more people .
to put this differently : larger markets save lives .
in this case misery truly does love company .
now think about the following : if china and india were as rich as the united states is today , the market for cancer drugs would be eight times larger than it is now .
now we are not there yet , but it is happening .
as other countries become richer the demand for these pharmaceuticals is going to increase tremendously .
and that means an increase incentive to do research and development , which benefits everyone in the world .
larger markets increase the incentive to produce all kinds of ideas , whether it 's software , whether it 's a computer chip , whether it 's a new design .
for the hollywood people in the audience , this even explains why action movies have larger budgets than comedies : it 's because action movies translate easier into other languages and other cultures , so the market for those movies is larger .
people are willing to invest more , and the budgets are larger .
alright . well if larger markets increase the incentive to produce new ideas , how do we maximize that incentive ?
it 's by having one world market , by globalizing the world .
the way i like to put this is : one idea . ideas are meant to be shared , so one idea can serve one world , one market .
one idea , one world , one market .
well how else can we create new ideas ?
that 's one reason .
globalize trade .
how else can we create new ideas ?
well , more idea creators .
now idea creators , they come from all walks of life .
artists and innovators -- many of the people you 've seen on this stage .
i 'm going to focus on scientists and engineers because i have some data on that , and i 'm a data person .
now , today , less than one - tenth of one percent of the world 's population are scientists and engineers .
the united states has been an idea leader .
a large fraction of those people are in the united states .
but the u.s. is losing its idea leadership .
and for that i am very grateful .
that is a good thing .
it is fortunate that we are becoming less of an idea leader because for too long the united states , and a handful of other developed countries , have shouldered the entire burden of research and development .
but consider the following : if the world as a whole were as wealthy as the united states is now there would be more than five times as many scientists and engineers contributing to ideas which benefit everyone , which are shared by everyone .
i think of the great indian mathematician , ramanujan .
how many ramanujans are there in india today toiling in the fields , barely able to feed themselves , when they could be feeding the world ?
now we 're not there yet .
but it is going to happen in this century .
the real tragedy of the last century is this : if you think about the world 's population as a giant computer , a massively parallel processor , then the great tragedy has been that billions of our processors have been off line .
but in this century china is coming on line .
india is coming on line .
africa is coming on line .
we will see an einstein in africa in this century .
here is just some data . this is china .
1996 : less than one million new university students in china per year ; 2006 : over five million .
now think what this means .
this means we all benefit when another country gets rich .
we should not fear other countries becoming wealthy .
that is something that we should embrace -- a wealthy china , a wealthy india , a wealthy africa .
we need a greater demand for ideas -- those larger markets i was talking about earlier -- and a greater supply of ideas for the world .
now you can see some of the reasons why i 'm optimistic .
globalization is increasing the demand for ideas , the incentive to create new ideas .
investments in education are increasing the supply of new ideas .
in fact if you look at world history you can see some reasons for optimism .
from about the beginnings of humanity to 1500 : zero economic growth , nothing .
1500 to 1800 : maybe a little bit of economic growth , but less in a century than you expect to see in a year today .
1900s : maybe one percent .
twentieth century : a little bit over two percent .
twenty - first century could easily be 3.3 , even higher percent .
even at that rate , by 2100 average gdp per capita in the world will be $ 200,000 .
that 's not u.s. gdp per capita , which will be over a million , but world gdp per capita -- $ 200,000 .
that 's not that far .
we wo n't make it .
but some of our grandchildren probably will .
and i should say , i think this is a rather modest prediction .
in kurzweilian terms this is gloomy .
in kurzweilian terms i 'm like the eeyore of economic growth .
alright what about problems ?
what about a great depression ?
well let 's take a look . let 's take a look at the great depression .
here is gdp per capita from 1900 to 1929 .
now let 's imagine that you were an economist in 1929 , trying to forecast future growth for the united states , not knowing that the economy was about to go off a cliff , not knowing that we were about to enter the greatest economic disaster certainly in the 20th century .
what would you have predicted , not knowing this ?
if you had based your prediction , your forecast on 1900 to 1929 you 'd have predicted something like this .
if you 'd been a little more optimistic -- say , based upon the roaring twenties -- you 'd have said this .
so what actually happened ?
we went off a cliff but we recovered .
in fact in the second half of the 20th century growth was even higher than anything you would have predicted based upon the first half of the 20th century .
so growth can wash away even what appears to be a great depression .
alright . what else ?
oil . oil . this was a big topic .
when i was writing up my notes oil was $ 140 per barrel .
so people were asking a question . they were saying , " is china drinking our milkshake ? "
and there is some truth to this , in the sense that we have something of a finite resource , and increased growth is going to push up demand for that .
but i think i do n't have to tell this audience that a higher price of oil is not necessarily a bad thing .
moreover , as everyone knows , look -- it 's energy , not oil , which counts .
and higher oil prices mean a greater incentive to invest in energy r&d .
you can see this in the data .
as oil prices go up , energy patents go up .
the world is much better equipped to overcome an increase in the price of oil today , than ever in the past , because of what i 'm talking about .
one idea , one world , one market .
so i 'm optimistic so long as we hew to these two ideas : to keep globalizing world markets , keep extending cooperation across national boundaries , and keep investing in education .
now the united states has a particularly important role to play in this : to keep our education system globalized , to keep our education system open to students from all over the world , because our education system is the candle that other students come to light their own candles .
now remember here what jefferson said .
jefferson said , " when they come and light their candles at ours , they gain light , and we are not darkened . "
but jefferson was n't quite right , was he ?
because the truth is , when they light their candles at ours , there is twice as much light available for everyone .
so my view is : be optimistic .
spread the ideas . spread the light .
thank you .
