everyone , please think of your biggest personal goal .
for real -- you can take a second . you 've got to feel this to learn it .
take a few seconds and think of your personal biggest goal , okay ?
imagine deciding right now that you 're going to do it .
imagine telling someone that you meet today what you 're going to do .
imagine their congratulations and their high image of you .
does n't it feel good to say it out loud ?
do n't you feel one step closer already , like it 's already becoming part of your identity ?
well , bad news : you should have kept your mouth shut , because that good feeling now will make you less likely to do it .
repeated psychology tests have proven that telling someone your goal makes it less likely to happen .
any time you have a goal , there are some steps that need to be done , some work that needs to be done in order to achieve it .
ideally , you would not be satisfied until you had actually done the work .
but when you tell someone your goal and they acknowledge it , psychologists have found that it 's called a " social reality . "
the mind is kind of tricked into feeling that it 's already done .
and then , because you felt that satisfaction , you 're less motivated to do the actual hard work necessary .
so this goes against the conventional wisdom that we should tell our friends our goals , right -- so they hold us to it .
so , let 's look at the proof .
1926 , kurt lewin , founder of social psychology , called this " substitution . "
1933 , vera mahler found , when it was acknowledged by others , it felt real in the mind .
1982 , peter gollwitzer wrote a whole book about this and in 2009 , he did some new tests that were published .
it goes like this : 163 people across four separate tests -- everyone wrote down their personal goal .
then half of them announced their commitment to this goal to the room , and half did n't .
then everyone was given 45 minutes of work that would directly lead them towards their goal , but they were told that they could stop at any time .
now , those who kept their mouths shut worked the entire 45 minutes , on average , and when asked afterwards , said that they felt that they had a long way to go still to achieve their goal .
but those who had announced it quit after only 33 minutes , on average , and when asked afterwards , said that they felt much closer to achieving their goal .
so , if this is true , what can we do ?
well , you could resist the temptation to announce your goal .
you can delay the gratification that the social acknowledgement brings , and you can understand that your mind mistakes the talking for the doing .
but if you do need to talk about something , you can state it in a way that gives you no satisfaction , such as , " i really want to run this marathon , so i need to train five times a week and kick my ass if i do n't , okay ? "
so audience , next time you 're tempted to tell someone your goal , what will you say ?
exactly , well done .
