people love their automobiles .
they allow us to go where we want to when we want to .
they 're a form of entertainment , they 're a form of art , a pride of ownership .
songs are written about cars .
prince wrote a great song : " little red corvette . "
he did n't write " little red laptop computer " or " little red dirt devil . "
he wrote about a car .
and one of my favorites has always been , " make love to your man in a chevy van , " because that was my vehicle when i was in college .
the fact is , when we do our market research around the world , we see that there 's nearly a universal aspiration on the part of people to own an automobile .
and 750 million people in the world today own a car .
and you say , boy , that 's a lot .
but you know what ?
that 's just 12 percent of the population .
we really have to ask the question : can the world sustain that number of automobiles ?
and if you look at projections over the next 10 to 15 to 20 years , it looks like the world car park could grow to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles .
now , if you parked those end to end and wrapped them around the earth , that would stretch around the earth 125 times .
now , we 've made great progress with automobile technology over the last 100 years .
cars are dramatically cleaner , dramatically safer , more efficient and radically more affordable than they were 100 years ago .
but the fact remains : the fundamental dna of the automobile has stayed pretty much the same .
if we are going to reinvent the automobile today , rather than 100 years ago , knowing what we know about the issues associated with our product and about the technologies that exist today , what would we do ?
we wanted something that was really affordable .
the fuel cell looked great : one - tenth as many moving parts and a fuel - cell propulsion system as an internal combustion engine -- and it emits just water .
and we wanted to take advantage of moore 's law with electronic controls and software , and we absolutely wanted our car to be connected .
so we embarked upon the reinvention around an electrochemical engine , the fuel cell , hydrogen as the energy carrier .
first was autonomy .
autonomy really set the vision for where we wanted to head .
we embodied all of the key components of a fuel cell propulsion system .
we then had autonomy drivable with hy - wire , and we showed hy - wire here at this conference last year .
hy - wire is the world 's first drivable fuel cell , and we have followed up that now with sequel .
and sequel truly is a real car .
so if we would run the video -- but the real key question i 'm sure that 's on your mind : where 's the hydrogen going to come from ?
and secondly , when are these kinds of cars going to be available ?
so let me talk about hydrogen first .
the beauty of hydrogen is it can come from so many different sources : it can come from fossil fuels , it can come from any way that you can create electricity , and it can come from biofuels .
and that 's quite exciting .
the vision here is to have each local community play to its natural strength in creating the hydrogen .
a lot of hydrogen 's produced today in the world .
it 's produced to get sulfur out of gasoline -- which i find is somewhat ironic .
it 's produced in the fertilizer industry ; it 's produced in the chemical manufacturing industry .
that hydrogen 's being made because there 's a good business reason for its use .
but it tells us that we know how to create it , we know how to create it cost effectively , we know how to handle it safely .
we did an analysis where you would have a station in each city with each of the 100 largest cities in the united states , and located the stations so you 'd be no more than two miles from a station at any time .
we put one every 25 miles on the freeway , and it turns out that translates into about 12,000 stations .
and at a million dollars each , that would be about 12 billion dollars .
now that 's a lot of money .
but if you built the alaskan pipeline today , that 's half of what the alaskan pipeline would cost .
but the real exciting vision that we see truly is home refueling , much like recharging your laptop or recharging your cellphone .
so we 're pretty excited about the future of hydrogen .
we think it 's a question of not whether , but a question of when .
what we 've targeted for ourselves -- and we 're making great progress for this goal -- is to have a propulsion system based on hydrogen and fuel cells , designed and validated , that can go head - to - head with the internal combustion engine -- we 're talking about obsoleting the internal combustion engine -- and do it in terms of its affordability , add skill volumes , its performance and its durability .
so that 's what we 're driving to for 2010 .
we have n't seen anything yet in our development work that says that is n't possible .
we actually think the future 's going to be event - driven .
so since we ca n't predict the future , we want to spend a lot of our time trying to create that future .
i 'm very , very intrigued by the fact that our cars and trucks sit idle 90 percent of the time : they 're parked , they 're parked all around us .
they 're usually parked within 100 feet of the people that own them .
now , if you take the power - generating capability of an automobile and you compare that to the electric grid in the united states , it turns out that four percent of the automobiles , the power in four percent of the automobiles , equals that of the electric grid of the us .
that 's a huge power - generating capability , a mobile power - generating capability .
and hydrogen and fuel cells give us that opportunity to actually use our cars and trucks when they 're parked to generate electricity for the grid .
and we talked about swarm networks earlier .
and talking about the ultimate swarm , about having all of the processors and all of the cars when they 're sitting idle being part of a global grid for computing capability .
we find that premise quite exciting .
the automobile becomes , then , an appliance , not in a commodity sense , but an appliance , mobile power , mobile platform for information and computing and communication , as well as a form of transportation .
and the key to all of this is to make it affordable , to make it exciting , to get it on a pathway where there 's a way to make money doing it .
and again , this is a pretty big march to take here .
and a lot of people say , how do you sleep at night when you 're rustling with a problem of that magnitude ?
and i tell them i sleep like a baby : i wake up crying every two hours .
actually the theme of this conference , i think , has hit on really one of the major keys to pull that off -- and that 's relationships and working together .
thank you very much .
.
chris anderson : larry , larry , wait , wait , wait , wait , larry , wait , wait one sec .
just -- i 've got so many questions i could ask you .
i just want to ask one .
you know , i could be wrong about this , but my sense is that in the public mind , today , that gm is not viewed as serious about some of these environmental ideas as some of your japanese competitors , maybe even as ford .
are you serious about it , and not just , you know , when the consumers want it , when the regulators force us to do it we will go there ?
are you guys going to really try and show leadership on this ?
larry burns : yeah , we 're absolutely serious .
we 're into this over a billion dollars already , so i would hope people would think we 're serious when we 're spending that kind of money .
and secondly , it 's a fundamental business proposition .
i 'll be honest with you : we 're into it because of business growth opportunities .
we ca n't grow our business unless we solve these problems .
the growth of the auto industry will be capped by sustainability issues if we do n't solve the problems .
and there 's a simple principle of strategy that says : do unto yourself before others do unto you .
if we can see this possible future , others can too .
and we want to be the first one to create it , chris .
