let 's talk about manias .
let 's start with beatle mania : hysterical teenagers , crying , screaming , pandemonium .
sports mania : deafening crowds , all for one idea -- get the ball in the net .
okay , religious mania : there 's rapture , there 's weeping , there 's visions .
manias can be good .
manias can be alarming .
or manias can be deadly .
the world has a new mania .
a mania for learning english .
listen as chinese students practice their english by screaming it .
teacher : ... change my life !
students : i will change my life .
t : i do n't want to let my parents down .
s : i do n't want to let my parents down .
t : i do n't ever want to let my country down .
s : i do n't ever want to let my country down .
t : most importantly ... s : most importantly ...
t : i do n't want to let myself down .
s : i do n't want to let myself down .
jay walker : how many people are trying to learn english worldwide ?
two billion of them .
students : a t - shirt . a dress .
jw : in latin america , in india , in southeast asia , and most of all in china .
if you are a chinese student you start learning english in the third grade , by law .
that 's why this year china will become the world 's largest english - speaking country .
why english ? in a single word : opportunity .
opportunity for a better life , a job , to be able to pay for school , or put better food on the table .
imagine a student taking a giant test for three full days .
her score on this one test literally determines her future .
she studies 12 hours a day for three years to prepare .
25 percent of her grade is based on english .
it 's called the gaokao , and 80 million high school chinese students have already taken this grueling test .
the intensity to learn english is almost unimaginable , unless you witness it .
teacher : perfect ! students : perfect !
t : perfect ! s : perfect !
t : i want to speak perfect english .
s : i want to speak perfect english .
t : i want to speak -- s : i want to speak -- t : perfect english . s : perfect english .
t : i want to change my life !
s : i want to change my life !
jw : so is english mania good or bad ?
is english a tsunami , washing away other languages ? not likely .
english is the world 's second language .
your native language is your life .
but with english you can become part of a wider conversation : a global conversation about global problems , like climate change or poverty , or hunger or disease .
the world has other universal languages .
mathematics is the language of science .
music is the language of emotions .
and now english is becoming the language of problem - solving .
not because america is pushing it , but because the world is pulling it .
so english mania is a turning point .
like the harnessing of electricity in our cities or the fall of the berlin wall , english represents hope for a better future -- a future where the world has a common language to solve its common problems .
thank you very much .
