i just want to say , over the last few years i 've been -- had the opportunity to do this closing conference .
and i 've had some incredible warm - up acts .
about eight years ago , billy graham opened for me . and i thought that there was -- i thought that there was absolutely no way in hell to top that .
but i just wanted to say -- and i mean this without irony -- i think i can speak for everybody in the audience when i say that i wish to god that you were the president of the united states .
ok , this is the title of my talk today .
i just want to give you a quick overview .
first of all , please remember i 'm completely politically correct , and i mean everything with great affection .
if any of you have sensitive stomachs or are feeling queasy , now is the time to check your blackberry .
just to review , this is my tedtalk .
we 're going to do some jokes , some gags , some little skits -- and then we 're going to talk about the l 1 point .
so , one of the questions i ask myself is , was this the most distressing ted ever ?
let 's try and sum things up , shall we ?
images of limb regeneration and faces filled with smallpox : 21 percent of the conference .
mentions of polar bears drowning : four percent .
images of the earth being wiped out by flood or bird flu : 64 percent .
and david pogue singing show tunes .
because this is the most distressing ted ever , i 've been working with neil gershenfeld on next year 's ted bag .
and if the -- if the conference is anywhere near this distressing , then we 're going to have a scream bag next year .
it 's going to be a cradle - to - cradle scream bag , of course .
so you 're going to be able to go like this .
bring it over here and open it up . aaaah !
meanwhile , back at ted university , this wonderful woman is teaching you how to chop sun chips .
so robert wright -- i do n't know , i felt like if there was anyone that helen needed to give antidepressants to , it might have been him .
i want to deliberately interfere with his dopamine levels .
he was talking about morality .
economy class morality is , we want to bomb you back to the stone age .
business class morality is , do n't bomb japan -- they built my car .
and first - class morality is , do n't bomb mexico -- they clean my house .
yes , it is politically incorrect .
all right ,
now i want to do a little bit of a thing for you ...
all right , now these are the wha -- i 'd say , [ mumble , mumble -- mumble , mumble , mumble , mumble , mumble ] -- ahh !
so i wanted to show you guys -- i wanted to talk about a revolutionary new computer interface that lets you work with images just as easily as you -- as a completely natural user interface .
and you can -- you can use really natural hand gestures to like , go like this .
now we had a harvard professor here -- she was from harvard , i just wanted to mention and -- and she was actually a professor from harvard .
and she was talking about seven - dimensional , inverted universes .
with , you know , of course , there 's the gravity brain . there 's the weak brain . and then there 's my weak brain , which is too -- too -- absolutely too weak to understand what the fuck she was talking about .
now --
one of the things that is very important to me is to try and figure out what on earth am i here for .
and that 's why i went out and i picked up a best - selling business book .
you know , it basically uses as its central premise greek mythology .
and it 's by a guy named pastor rick warren , and it 's called " the porpoise driven life . "
and rick is as a pagan god , which i thought was kind of appropriate , in a certain way .
and now we 're going to have kind of a little more visualization about rick warren .
ok . all right .
now , red is rick warren , and green is daniel dennett , ok ?
the scales here are religiosity from zero percent , or atheist , to 100 percent , bible literally true .
and then this is books sold -- the logarithmic scale .
30,000 , 300,000 , three million , 30 million , 300 million .
ok , now they 're duking it out . now they 're duking it out .
and rick warren 's kind of pulling ahead , kind of pulling ahead .
yup , and his installed base is getting a little bigger .
but darwin 's dangerous idea is coming back . it 's coming back .
let me turn the trails on , so you can see that a little bit better .
now , one of the things that 's very important is , nicholas negroponte talked to us about one lap dance per -- i 'm sorry -- about one laptop per child .
now let 's talk about some of the characteristics that are important for this revolutionary device .
i 'll tell you a little bit about the design parameters , and then i 'll show it to you in person .
first of all , it needs to be small .
it needs to be flat , so it 's transportable .
lightweight . portable .
uses very , very little power .
very , very high resolution .
has to be visible in bright daylight . will work anywhere .
and broadly applicable across many platforms .
now , we 've actually done some research -- neil gershenfeld and the fab labs went out into the market .
they did some research ; we came back ; and we think we have the perfect prototype of what the students in the field are actually asking for .
and here it is , the $ 100 computer .
ok , ok , ok , ok -- excellent , excellent .
now , i bought this device from clifford stoll for about 900 bucks .
and he and his team of junior - high school students were doing real science .
so we 're trying to check and trying to douse here , and see who uses marijuana .
see who uses marijuana .
are we going to be able to find any marijuana , jim young ?
only if we open enough locker doors .
ok , now smallpox is an extremely distressing illness .
we had dr. larry brilliant talking about how we eradicated smallpox .
i wanted to show you the stages of smallpox .
we start . this is day one .
day two .
day three , she gets a massively big pox on her shoulder .
day three .
day four . day five and day six .
now the good news is , because i 'm a trained medical professional , i know that even though she 'll be scarred for life , she 's going to make a full recovery .
now the good news about architects for humanity is they 're really kind of the most amazing group .
they 've been sponsoring a design competition to come up with innovative medical housing solutions , clinic solutions , in africa , and they 've had a design competition .
now the wonderful thing is , larry brilliant was just appointed the head of the google foundation ,
and so he decided that he would support -- he would support cameron 's work .
and the way he decided to support that work was by shipping over 50,000 shipping containers of google snacks .
so i want to show you some prototypes .
the u.n. -- you know , they took 20 years just to add a flap to a tent ,
but i think we have some more exciting things .
this is a home made entirely out of fruit roll - ups . and those roll - up cookies coated with white chocolate .
and the really wonderful thing about this is , when you 're done , well -- you can eat it .
but the thing that i 'm really , really excited about is this incredible granola house .
and the granola house has a special sun chip roof to collect water and recycle it .
and it 's -- well , on this side it has regular sour patch kids and gummy bears to let in the light .
but on this side , it has sugary gummy bears , to diffuse the light more slightly .
and we -- we wanted just to show you what this might look like in situ .
so , einstein -- einstein , tell me -- what 's your favorite song ?
no , i said what 's your favorite song ?
no , i said what 's your favorite song ?
" free bird . "
ok , so , einstein , what 's your favorite singing group ?
could you say that again ? what 's your favorite singing group ?
ok , one more time -- i 'm just going to give you a little help .
your favorite singing group -- it 's diana ross and the -- audience : supremes !
tom reilly : exactly .
could we have the sound up on the laptop , please ?
" free bird " kind of reminds me that if you -- if you listen to " free bird " backwards , this is what you might hear .
computer : satan . satan . satan . satan .
satan . satan . satan .
tr : now it 's a little hard to hear the whole message , so i wanted to -- so i wanted to help you a little bit .
computer : my sweet satan . dan dennett worships satan .
buy " the purpose - driven life , " or satan will take your soul .
tr : so , we 've talked a lot about global warming , but , you know , as jill said , it sounds kind of nice -- good weather in the wintertime , and new york city .
and as jay walker pointed out , that is just not scary enough .
so al , i actually think i 'm rather good at branding .
so i 've tried to figure out a good design process to come up with a new term to replace " global warming . "
so we started with babel fish . we put in global warming .
and then we decided that we 'd change it from english to dutch -- into " het globale verwarmen . "
from dutch to chinese , into " hordahordaneecheewa . "
chinese to portuguese : aquecer - se global .
then portuguese to pig latin .
aquecer - se ucked - fay .
and then finally back into the english , which is , we 're totally fucked .
now i do n't know about you , but michael shermer talked about the willingness for human beings -- evolutionarily , they 're designed to see patterns in things .
for example , in cheese sandwiches .
now can you look at that carefully and see if you see the virgin mary ?
i tried to make it a little bit clearer .
is it the virgin mary ?
or is it mena trott ?
so , i talked to josh prince - ramus about the convention center and the conferences . it 's getting awfully big .
it 's getting just a little bit too big . it 's bursting at the seams here a little bit .
so we tried to come up with a program -- how we could remake this structure to better accommodate ted .
so first of all we decided -- that we needed about one - third bookstore , one - third google cafe , about 20 percent registration , 80 percent luxury hotel , about five percent for restrooms .
and then of course , we wanted to have the simulcast lounge , the lobby and the steinbeck forum .
now let me show you how that literally translated into the design program .
so first , one of the problems with monterey is that if there is global warming and greenland melts as you say , the ocean level is going to rise 20 feet and flood the hell out of the convention center .
so we 're going to build this new building on stilts .
so we build this building on stilts , then up here -- is where we 're going to put the new steinbeck auditorium .
and the wonderful thing about the new bookstore is , it 's going to be shaped in a spiral that 's organized by the dewey decimal system .
then we 're going to make an escalator that helps you get up there .
and finally , we 're going to put the marriott hotel and the portola plaza on the top .
now i do n't know about you , but sometimes i have these images in my head of separated at birth .
i do n't know about you , but when i see aubrey de grey , i immediately go to gandalf the grey .
ok . now , we 've heard , of course , that we 're all soldiers here .
so what i 'd really , really like you to do now is , pick up your white piece of paper . does everybody have their white piece of paper ?
and i want you to get out a pen , and i want you to write a terrorist note .
if we put up the elmo for a moment -- if we put up the elmo , then we 'll get , you know , i 'll give you a model that you can work from , ok ?
and then i want you to fold that note into a paper airplane .
and once you 've folded it into a paper airplane , i want you to take some anthrax -- and i want you to put that in the paper airplane .
and then i want you to throw it on jim young .
luckily , i was the recipient of the ted prize this year .
and i wanted to see -- i want to dedicate this film to my father , homer .
ok . now this film is n't really hard enough ,
so i wanted to make it a little bit harder .
so i 'm going to try and do this while reciting pi .
3.1415 , 2657 , 753 , 8567 , 24972 -- -- 85871 , 25871 , 3928 , 5657 , 2592 , 5624 .
can we cue the music please ?
now i wanted to use this talk to talk about global warming a little bit .
back in 1968 , you can see that the mountain range of brokeback mountain was covered in 151 inches of snow pack .
parenthetically , over there on the slopes , i did want to show you that black men ski .
but over the years , 10 years later , the snow packs eroded , and , if you notice , the trees have started turning yellow .
the water level of the lake has started drying up .
a few years later , there 's no snow left at all .
and all the trees have turned brown .
this year , unfortunately the lakebed 's turned into an absolute cracked dry bed .
and i fear , if we do nothing for our planet , in 20 years , it 's going to look like this .
mr. vice president , i wish i knew how to quit you .
thank you very much .
