i was here about four years ago , talking about the relationship of design and happiness .
at the very end of it , i showed a list under that title .
i learned very few things in addition since -- but made a whole number of them into projects since .
these are inflatable monkeys in every city in scotland : " everybody always thinks they are right . " they were combined in the media .
" drugs are fun in the beginning but become a drag later on . "
we 're doing changing media .
this is a projection that can see the viewer as the viewer walks by .
you ca n't help but actually ripping that spider web apart .
all of these things are pieces of graphic design .
we do them for our clients .
they are commissioned . i would never have the money to actually pay for the installment or pay for all the billboards or the production of these , so there 's always a client attached to them .
these are 65,000 coat hangers in a street that 's lined with fashion stores .
" worrying solves nothing . "
" money does not make me happy " appeared first as double - page spreads in a magazine .
the printer lost the file , did n't tell us .
when the magazine -- actually , when i got the subscription -- it was 12 following pages .
it said , " money does does make me happy . "
and a friend of mine in austria felt so sorry for me that he talked the largest casino owner in linz into letting us wrap his building .
so this is the big pedestrian zone in linz . it just says " money , " and if you look down the side street , it says , " does not make me happy . "
we had a show that just came down last week in new york .
we steamed up the windows permanently , and every hour we had a different designer come in and write these things that they 've learned into the steam in the window .
everybody participated -- milton glaser ,
massimo vignelli .
singapore was quite in discussion .
this is a little spot that we filmed there that 's to be displayed on the large jumbotrons in singapore . and , of course , it 's one that 's dear to my heart , because all of these sentiments -- some banal , some a bit more profound -- all originally had come out of my diary .
and i do go often into the diary and check if i wanted to change something about the situation .
if it 's -- see it for a long enough time , i actually do something about it .
and the very last one is a billboard .
this is our roof in new york , the roof of the studio .
this is newsprint plus stencils that lie on the newsprint .
we let that lie around in the sun.
as you all know , newsprint yellows significantly in the sun.
after a week , we took the stencils and the leaves off , shipped the newsprints to lisbon to a very sunny spot , so on day one the billboard said , " complaining is silly . either act or forget . "
three days later it faded , and a week later , no more complaining anywhere .
thank you so much .
