what i 'd like you to do is , just really quickly , is just , sort of , nod to the person on your right , and then nod to the person on your left .
now , chances are that over the last winter , if you had been a beehive , either you or one of the two people you just nodded at would have died .
now , that 's an awful lot of bees .
and this is the second year in a row we have lost over 30 percent of the colonies , or we estimate we 've lost 30 percent of the colonies over the winter .
now , that 's a lot , a lot of bees , and that 's really important .
and most of those losses are because of things we know .
we know that there are these varroa mites that have introduced and caused a lot of losses , and we also have this new phenomenon , which i talked about last year , colony collapse disorder .
and here we see a picture on top of a hill in central valley last december .
and below , you can see all these out yards , or temporary yards , where the colonies are brought in until february , and then they 're shipped out to the almonds .
and one documentary writer , who was here and looked at this two months after i was here , described this not as beehives but as a graveyard , with these empty white boxes with no bees left in them .
now , i 'm going to sum up a year 's worth of work in two sentences to say that we have been trying to figure out what the cause of this is .
and what we know is that it 's as if the bees have caught a flu .
and this flu has wiped through the population of bees .
in some cases , and in fact in most cases in one year , this flu was caused by a new virus to us , or newly identified by us , called israeli acute paralysis virus .
it was called that because a guy in israel first found it , and he now regrets profoundly calling it that disease , because , of course , there 's the implication .
but we think this virus is pretty ubiquitous .
it 's also pretty clear that the bees sometimes catch other viruses or other flus , and so the question we 're still struggling with , and the question that keeps us up at night , is why have the bees suddenly become so susceptible to this flu , and why are they so susceptible to these other diseases ?
and we do n't have the answer to that yet , and we spend a lot of time trying to figure that out .
we think perhaps it 's a combination of factors .
we know from the work of a very large and dynamic working team that , you know , we 're finding a lot of different pesticides in the hive , and surprisingly , sometimes the healthiest hives have the most pesticides . and so we discover all these very strange things that we ca n't begin to understand .
and so this opens up the whole idea of looking at colony health .
now of course , if you lose a lot of colonies , beekeepers can replace them very quickly .
and that 's why we 've been able to recover from a lot of loss .
if we lost one in every three cows in the winter , you know , the national guard would be out .
but what beekeepers can do is , if they have one surviving colony , they can split that colony in two .
and then the one half that does n't have a queen , they can buy a queen .
it comes in the mail ; it can come from australia or hawaii or florida , and you can introduce that queen .
and in fact , america was the first country that ever did mail - delivery queens and in fact , it 's part of the postal code that you have to deliver queens by mail in order to make sure that we have enough bees in this country .
if you do n't just want a queen , you can buy , actually , a three - pound package of bees , which comes in the mail , and of course , the postal office is always very concerned when they get , you know , your three - pound packages of bees .
and you can install this in your hive and replace that dead - out .
so it means that beekeepers are very good at replacing dead - outs , and so they 've been able to cover those losses .
so even though we 've lost 30 percent of the colonies every year , the same number of colonies have existed in the country , at about 2.4 million colonies .
now , those losses are tragic on many fronts , and one of those fronts is for the beekeeper .
and it 's really important to talk about beekeepers first , because beekeepers are among the most fascinating people you 'll ever meet .
if this was a group of beekeepers , you would have everyone from the card - carrying nra member who 's , you know , live free or die , to the , you know , the self - expressed quirky san francisco backyard pig farmer .
and you get all of these people in the same room , and they 're all engaged and they 're getting along , and they 're all there because of the passion for bees .
now , there 's another part of that community which are the commercial beekeepers , the ones who make their livelihood from beekeeping alone .
and these tend to be some of the most independent , tenacious , intuitive , you know , inventive people you will ever meet .
they 're just fascinating . and they 're like that all over the world .
i had the privilege of working in haiti just for two weeks earlier this year .
and haiti , if you 've ever been there , is just a tragedy .
i mean , there may be 100 explanations for why haiti is the impoverished nation it is , but there is no excuse to see that sort of squalor .
but you meet this beekeeper , and i met this beekeeper here , and he is one of the most knowledgeable beekeepers i 've ever met .
no formal education , but very knowledgeable .
we needed beeswax for a project we were working on ; he was so capable , he was able to render the nicest block of beeswax i have ever seen from cow dung , tin cans and his veil , which he used as a screening , right in this meadow . and so that ingenuity is inspiring .
we also have dave hackenberg , who is the poster child of ccd .
he 's the one who first identified this condition and raised the alarm bells .
and he has a history of these trucks , and he 's moved these bees up and down the coast .
and a lot of people talk about trucks and moving bees , and that being bad , but we 've done that for thousands of years .
the ancient egyptians used to move bees up and down the nile on rafts , so this idea of a movable bee force is not new at all .
and one of our real worries with colony collapse disorder is the fact that it costs so much money to replace those dead - out colonies .
and you can do that one year in a row , you may be able to do it two years in a row .
but if you 're losing 50 percent to 80 percent of your colonies , you ca n't survive three years in a row . and we 're really worried about losing this segment of our industry .
and that 's important for many fronts , and one of them is because of that culture that 's in agriculture .
and these migratory beekeepers are the last nomads of america .
you know , they pick up their hives ; they move their families once or twice in a year .
and if you look at florida , in dade city , florida , that 's where all the pennsylvania beekeepers go .
and then 20 miles down the road is groveland , and that 's where all the wisconsin beekeepers go .
and if you 're ever in central valley in february , you go to this café at 10 o'clock in the morning , kathy and kate 's .
and that 's where all the beekeepers come after a night of moving bees into the almond groves .
they all have their breakfast and complain about everyone right there . and it 's a great experience , and i really encourage you to drop in at that diner during that time , because that 's quite essential american experience .
and we see these families , these nomadic families , you know , father to son , father to son , and these guys are hurting .
and they 're not people who like to ask for help , although they are the most helpful people ever .
if there 's one guy who loses all his bees because of a truck overhaul , everyone pitches in and gives 20 hives to help him replace those lost colonies .
and so , it 's a very dynamic , and i think , historic and exciting community to be involved with .
of course , the real importance for bees is not the honey .
and although i highly encourage you , all use honey .
i mean , it 's the most ethical sweetener , and you know , it 's a dynamic and fun sweetener .
but we estimate that about one in three bites of food we eat is directly or indirectly pollinated by honeybees .
now , i want to just illustrate that in the fact that if we look at the breakfast i had yesterday morning -- a little cranberry juice , some fruits , some granola , i should have had whole wheat bread , i realized , but you know , jam on my wonderbread , and some coffee -- and had we taken out all those ingredients , -- except for the almonds i was n't going to pick out from the granola -- if we had taken out all those ingredients the bees had indirectly or directly pollinated , we would n't have much on our plate .
so if we did not have bees , it 's not like we would starve , but clearly our diet would be diminished .
it 's said that for bees , the flower is the fountain of life , and for flowers bees are the messengers of love .
and that 's a really great expression , because really , bees are the sex workers for flowers . they are , you know -- they get paid for their services .
they get paid by pollen and nectar , to move that male sperm , the pollen , from flower to flower . and there are flowers that are self - infertile . that means they ca n't -- the pollen in their bloom ca n't fertilize themselves .
so in an apple orchard , for instance , you 'll have rows of 10 apples of one variety , and then you have another apple tree that 's a different type of pollen .
and bees are very faithful .
when they 're out pollinating or gathering pollen from one flower , they stay to that crop exclusively , in order to help generate .
and of course , they 're made to carry this pollen .
they build up a static electric charge and the pollen jumps on them and helps spread that pollen from bloom to bloom .
however , honeybees are a minority .
honeybees are not native to america ; they were introduced with the colonialists .
and there are actually more species of bees than there are mammals and birds combined .
in pennsylvania alone , we have been surveying bees for 150 years , and very intensely in the last three years .
we have identified over 400 species of bees in pennsylvania .
thirty - two species have not been identified or found in the state since 1950 .
now , that could be because we have n't been sampling right , but it does , i think , suggest that something 's wrong with the pollinator force . and these bees are fascinating .
we have bumblebees on the top .
and bumblebees are what we call eusocial : they 're not truly social , because only the queen is , over winter .
we also have the sweat bees , and these are little gems flying around .
they 're like tiny little flies and they fly around .
and then you have another type of bee , which we call kleptoparasites , which is a very fancy way of saying , bad - minded , murdering -- what 's the word i 'm looking for ? murdering -- audience : bee ?
dennis vanengelsdorp : bee . okay , thanks .
what these bees do is , they sit there . these solitary bees , they drill a hole in the ground or drill a hole in a branch , and they collect pollen and make it into a ball , and they lay an egg on it .
well , these bees hang out at that hole , and they wait for that mother to fly away , they go in , eat the egg , and lay their own egg there . so they do n't do any work .
and so , in fact , if you know you have these kleptoparasitic bees , you know that your environment is healthy , because they 're top - of - the - food - chain bees .
and in fact , there is now a red list of pollinators that we 're worried have disappeared , and on top of that list are a lot of these kleptoparasites , but also these bumblebees .
and in fact , if you guys live on the west coast , go to these websites here , and they 're really looking for people to look for some of these bumblebees , because we think some have gone extinct . or some , the population has declined .
and so it 's not just honeybees that are in trouble , but we do n't understand these native pollinators or all those other parts of our community .
and of course , bees are not the only important factor here .
there are other animals that pollinate , like bats , and bats are in trouble too .
and i 'm glad i 'm a bee man and not a bat man , because there 's no money to research the bat problems .
and bats are dying at an extraordinary rate .
white - nose syndrome has wiped out populations of bats .
if there 's a cave in new york that had 15,000 bats in it , and there are 1,000 left . that 's like san francisco becoming the population of half of this county in three years .
and so that 's incredible . and there 's no money to do that . but i 'm glad to say that i think we know the cause of all these conditions , and that cause is ndd : nature deficit disorder .
and that is that i think that what we have in our society is , we forgot our connection with nature .
and i think if we reconnect to nature , we 'll be able to have the resources and that interest to solve these problems .
and i think that there is an easy cure for ndd .
and that is , make meadows and not lawns .
and i think we have lost our connection , and this is a wonderful way of reconnecting to our environment .
i 've had the privilege of living by a meadow for the last little while , and it is terribly engaging .
and if we look at the history of lawns , it 's actually rather tragic .
it used to be , two , three hundred years ago , that a lawn was a symbol of prestige , and so it was only the very rich that could keep these green actually , deserts : they 're totally sterile .
americans spent , in 2001 -- 11 percent of all pesticide use was done on lawns .
five percent of our greenhouse gases are produced by mowing our lawns .
and so it 's incredible the amount of resources we 've spent keeping our lawns , which are these useless biosystems .
and so we need to rethink this idea .
in fact , you know , the white house used to have sheep in front in order to help fund the war effort in world war i , which probably is not a bad idea ; it would n't be a bad idea .
i want to say this not because i 'm opposed completely to mowing lawns .
i think that there is perhaps some advantage to keeping lawns at a limited scale , and i think we 're encouraged to do that .
but i also want to reinforce some of the ideas we 've heard here , because having a meadow or living by a meadow is transformational .
that it is amazing that connection we can have with what 's there .
these milkweed plants have grown up in my meadow over the last four years . add to watch the different plants , or insects , that come to these flowers , to watch that -- and we 've heard about , you know , this relationship you can have with wine , this companion you can have as it matures and as it has these different fragrances .
and this is a companion , and this is a relationship that never dries up .
you never run out of that companion as you drink this wine , too .
and i encourage you to look at that .
now , not all of us have meadows , or lawns that we can convert , and so you can always , of course , grow a meadow in a pot .
bees apparently , can be the gateway to , you know , other things .
so i 'm not saying that you should plant a meadow of pot , but a pot in a meadow .
but you can also have this great community of city or building - top beekeepers , these beekeepers that live -- this is in paris where these beekeepers live .
and everyone should open a beehive , because it is the most amazing , incredible thing .
and if we want to cure ourselves of ndd , or nature deficit disorder , i think this is a great way of doing it .
get a beehive and grow a meadow , and watch that life come back into your life .
and so with that , i think that what we can do , if we do this , we can make sure that our future -- our more perfect future -- includes beekeepers and it includes bees and it includes those meadows .
and that journey -- that journey of transformation that occurs as you grow your meadow and as you keep your bees or you watch those native bees there -- is an extremely exciting one .
and i hope that you experience it and i hope you tell me about it one day .
so thank you very much for being here . thank you very much .
