i 'm going around the world giving talks about darwin , and usually what i 'm talking about is darwin 's strange inversion of reasoning .
now that title , that phrase , comes from a critic , an early critic , and this is a passage that i just love , and would like to read for you .
" in the theory with which we have to deal , absolute ignorance is the artificer ; so that we may enunciate as the fundamental principle of the whole system , that , in order to make a perfect and beautiful machine , it is not requisite to know how to make it .
this proposition will be found on careful examination to express , in condensed form , the essential purport of the theory , and to express in a few words all mr. darwin 's meaning ; who , by a strange inversion of reasoning , seems to think absolute ignorance fully qualified to take the place of absolute wisdom in the achievements of creative skill . "
exactly . exactly . and it is a strange inversion .
a creationist pamphlet has this wonderful page in it : " test two : do you know of any building that did n't have a builder ? yes / no.
do you know of any painting that did n't have a painter ? yes / no.
do you know of any car that did n't have a maker ? yes / no.
if you answered ' yes ' for any of the above , give details . "
a - ha ! i mean , it really is a strange inversion of reasoning .
you would have thought it stands to reason that design requires an intelligent designer .
but darwin shows that it 's just false .
today , though , i 'm going to talk about darwin 's other strange inversion , which is equally puzzling at first , but in some ways just as important .
it stands to reason that we love chocolate cake because it is sweet .
guys go for girls like this because they are sexy .
we adore babies because they 're so cute .
and , of course , we are amused by jokes because they are funny .
this is all backwards . it is . and darwin shows us why .
let 's start with sweet . our sweet tooth is basically an evolved sugar detector , because sugar is high energy , and it 's just been wired up to the preferer , to put it very crudely , and that 's why we like sugar .
honey is sweet because we like it , not " we like it because honey is sweet . "
there 's nothing intrinsically sweet about honey .
if you looked at glucose molecules till you were blind , you would n't see why they tasted sweet .
you have to look in our brains to understand why they 're sweet .
so if you think first there was sweetness , and then we evolved to like sweetness , you 've got it backwards ; that 's just wrong . it 's the other way round .
sweetness was born with the wiring which evolved .
and there 's nothing intrinsically sexy about these young ladies .
and it 's a good thing that there is n't , because if there were , then mother nature would have a problem : how on earth do you get chimps to mate ?
now you might think , ah , there 's a solution : hallucinations . that would be one way of doing it , but there 's a quicker way . just wire the chimps up to love that look , and apparently they do .
that 's all there is to it .
over six million years , we and the chimps evolved our different ways .
we became bald - bodied , oddly enough ; for one reason or another , they did n't .
if we had n't , then probably this would be the height of sexiness .
our sweet tooth is an evolved and instinctual preference for high - energy food .
it was n't designed for chocolate cake .
chocolate cake is a supernormal stimulus .
the term is owed to niko tinbergen , who did his famous experiments with gulls , where he found that that orange spot on the gull 's beak -- if he made a bigger , oranger spot the gull chicks would peck at it even harder .
it was a hyperstimulus for them , and they loved it .
what we see with , say , chocolate cake is it 's a supernormal stimulus to tweak our design wiring .
and there are lots of supernormal stimuli ; chocolate cake is one .
there 's lots of supernormal stimuli for sexiness .
and there 's even supernormal stimuli for cuteness . here 's a pretty good example .
it 's important that we love babies , and that we not be put off by , say , messy diapers .
so babies have to attract our affection and our nurturing , and they do .
and , by the way , a recent study shows that mothers prefer the smell of the dirty diapers of their own baby .
so nature works on many levels here .
but now , if babies did n't look the way they do -- if babies looked like this , that 's what we would find adorable , that 's what we would find --
we would think , oh my goodness , do i ever want to hug that .
this is the strange inversion .
well now , finally what about funny . my answer is , it 's the same story , the same story .
this is the hard one , the one that is n't obvious . that 's why i leave it to the end .
and i wo n't be able to say too much about it .
but you have to think evolutionarily , you have to think , what hard job that has to be done -- it 's dirty work , somebody 's got to do it -- is so important to give us such a powerful , inbuilt reward for it when we succeed .
now , i think we 've found the answer -- i and a few of my colleagues .
it 's a neural system that 's wired up to reward the brain for doing a grubby clerical job .
our bumper sticker for this view is that this is the joy of debugging .
now i 'm not going to have time to spell it all out , but i 'll just say that only some kinds of debugging get the reward .
and what we 're doing is we 're using humor as a sort of neuroscientific probe by switching humor on and off , by turning the knob on a joke -- now it 's not funny ... oh , now it 's funnier ...
now we 'll turn a little bit more ... now it 's not funny -- in this way , we can actually learn something about the architecture of the brain , the functional architecture of the brain .
matthew hurley is the first author of this . we call it the hurley model .
he 's a computer scientist , reginald adams a psychologist , and there i am , and we 're putting this together into a book .
thank you very much .
