some 17 years ago , i became allergic to delhi 's air .
my doctors told me that my lung capacity had gone down to 70 percent , and it was killing me .
with the help of iit , teri , and learnings from nasa , we discovered that there are three basic green plants , common green plants , with which we can grow all the fresh air we need indoors to keep us healthy .
we 've also found that you can reduce the fresh air requirements into the building , while maintaining industry indoor air - quality standards .
the three plants are areca palm , mother - in - law 's tongue and money plant .
the botanical names are in front of you .
areca palm is a plant which removes co 2 and converts it into oxygen .
we need four shoulder - high plants per person , and in terms of plant care , we need to wipe the leaves every day in delhi , and perhaps once a week in cleaner - air cities .
we had to grow them in vermi manure , which is sterile , or hydroponics , and take them outdoors every three to four months .
the second plant is mother - in - law 's tongue , which is again a very common plant , and we call it a bedroom plant , because it converts co 2 into oxygen at night .
and we need six to eight waist - high plants per person .
the third plant is money plant , and this is again a very common plant ; preferably grows in hydroponics .
and this particular plant removes formaldehydes and other volatile chemicals .
with these three plants , you can grow all the fresh air you need .
in fact , you could be in a bottle with a cap on top , and you would not die at all , and you would not need any fresh air .
we have tried these plants at our own building in delhi , which is a 50,000 - square - feet , 20 - year - old building .
and it has close to 1,200 such plants for 300 occupants .
our studies have found that there is a 42 percent probability of one 's blood oxygen going up by one percent if one stays indoors in this building for 10 hours .
the government of india has discovered or published a study to show that this is the healthiest building in new delhi .
and the study showed that , compared to other buildings , there is a reduced incidence of eye irritation by 52 percent , respiratory systems by 34 percent , headaches by 24 percent , lung impairment by 12 percent and asthma by nine percent .
and this study has been published on september 8 , 2008 , and it 's available on the government of india website .
our experience points to an amazing increase in human productivity by over 20 percent by using these plants .
and also a reduction in energy requirements in buildings by an outstanding 15 percent , because you need less fresh air .
we are now replicating this in a 1.75 - million - square - feet building , which will have 60,000 indoor plants .
why is this important ?
it is also important for the environment , because the world 's energy requirements are expected to grow by 30 percent in the next decade .
40 percent of the world 's energy is taken up by buildings currently , and 60 percent of the world 's population will be living in buildings in cities with a population of over one million in the next 15 years .
and there is a growing preference for living and working in air - conditioned places .
" be the change you want to see in the world , " said mahatma gandhi .
and thank you for listening .
