all human life , all life , depends on plants .
let me try to convince you of that in a few seconds .
just think for a moment .
it does n't matter whether you live in a small african village , or you live in a big city , everything comes back to plants in the end :
whether it 's for the food , the medicine , the fuel , the construction , the clothing , all the obvious things ; or whether it 's for the spiritual and recreational things that matter to us so much ; or whether it 's soil formation , or the effect on the atmosphere , or primary production .
damn it , even the books here are made out of plants .
all these things , they come back to plants .
and without them we would n't be here .
now plants are under threat .
they 're under threat because of changing climate .
and they are also under threat because they are sharing a planet with people like us .
and people like us want to do things that destroy plants , and their habitats .
and whether that 's because of food production , or because of the introduction of alien plants into places that they really ought n't be , or because of habitats being used for other purposes -- all these things are meaning that plants have to adapt , or die , or move .
and plants sometimes find it rather difficult to move because there might be cities and other things in the way .
so if all human life depends on plants , does n't it make sense that perhaps we should try to save them ?
i think it does .
and i want to tell you about a project to save plants .
and the way that you save plants is by storing seeds .
because seeds , in all their diverse glory , are plants ' futures .
all the genetic information for future generations of plants are held in seeds .
so here is the building ;
it looks rather unassuming , really .
but it goes down below ground many stories .
and it 's the largest seed bank in the world .
it exists not only in southern england , but distributed around the world . i 'll come to that .
this is a nuclear - proof facility .
god forbid that it should have to withstand that .
so if you 're going to build a seed bank , you have to decide what you 're going to store in it . right ?
and we decided that what we want to store first of all , are the species that are most under threat .
and those are the dry land species .
so first of all we did deals with 50 different countries .
it means negotiating with heads of state , and with secretaries of state in 50 countries to sign treaties .
we have 120 partner institutions all over the world , in all those countries colored orange .
people come from all over the world to learn ,
and then they go away and plan exactly how they 're going to collect these seeds .
they have thousands of people all over the world tagging places where those plants are said to exist .
they search for them . they find them in flower .
and they go back when their seeds have arrived .
and they collect the seeds . all over the world .
the seeds -- some of if is very untechnical .
you kind of shovel them all in to bags and dry them off .
you label them . you do some high - tech things here and there ,
some low - tech things here and there .
and the main thing is that you have to dry them very carefully , at low temperature .
and then you have to store them at about minus 20 degrees c -- that 's about minus four fahrenheit , i think -- with a very critically low moisture content .
and these seeds will be able to germinate , we believe , with many of the species , in thousands of years , and certainly in hundreds of years .
it 's no good storing the seeds if you do n't know they 're still viable .
so every 10 years we do germination tests on every sample of seeds that we have .
and this is a distributed network .
so all around the world people are doing the same thing .
and that enables us to develop germination protocols .
that means that we know the right combination of heat and cold and the cycles that you have to get to make the seed germinate .
and that is very useful information .
and then we grow these things ,
and we tell people , back in the countries where these seeds have come from , " look , actually we 're not just storing this to get the seeds later , but we can give you this information about how to germinate these difficult plants . "
and that 's already happening .
so where have we got to ?
i am pleased to unveil that our three billionth seed -- that 's three thousand millionth seed -- is now stored .
ten percent of all plant species on the planet ,
24,000 species are safe ;
30,000 species , if we get the funding , by next year .
twenty - five percent of all the world 's plants , by 2020 .
these are not just crop plants , as you might have seen stored in svalbard in norway --
fantastic work there .
this is at least 100 times bigger .
we have thousands of collections that have been sent out all over the world :
drought - tolerant forest species sent to pakistan and egypt ;
especially photosynthetic - efficient plants come here to the united states ;
salt - tolerant pasture species sent to australia ;
the list goes on and on .
these seeds are used for restoration .
so in habitats that have already been damaged ,
like the tall grass prairie here in the usa , or in mined land in various countries , restoration is already happening because of these species --
and because of this collection .
some of these plants , like the ones on the bottom to the left of your screen , they are down to the last few remaining members .
the one where the guy is collecting seeds there on the truck , that is down to about 30 last remaining trees .
fantastically useful plant , both for protein and for medicine .
we have training going on in china , in the usa , and many other countries .
how much does it cost ?
2,800 dollars per species is the average .
i think that 's cheap , at the price .
and that gets you all the scientific data that goes with it .
the future research is " how can we find the genetic and molecular markers for the viability of seeds , without having to plant them every 10 years ? "
and we 're almost there .
thank you very much .
