so let me just start with my story .
so i tore my knee joint meniscus cartilage playing soccer in college .
then i went on to tear my acl , the ligament in my knee , and then developed an arthritic knee .
and i 'm sure that many of you in this audience have that same story ,
and , by the way , i married a woman who has exactly the same story .
so this motivated me to become an orthopedic surgeon and to see if i could n't focus on solutions for those problems that would keep me playing sports and not limit me .
so with that , let me just show you a quick video to get you in the mood of what we 're trying to explain .
narrator : we are all aware of the risk of cancer , but there 's another disease that 's destined to affect even more of us : arthritis .
cancer may kill you , but when you look at the numbers , arthritis ruins more lives .
assuming you live a long life , there 's a 50 percent chance you 'll develop arthritis .
and it 's not just aging that causes arthritis .
common injuries can lead to decades of pain , until our joints quite literally grind to a halt .
desperate for a solution , we 've turned to engineering to design artificial components to replace our worn - out body parts ,
but in the midst of the modern buzz around the promises of a bionic body , should n't we stop and ask if there 's a better , more natural way ?
let 's consider an alternative path .
what if all the replacements our bodies need already exist in nature , or within our own stem cells ?
this is the field of biologic replacements , where we replace worn - out parts with new , natural ones .
kevin stone : and so , the mission is : how do i treat these things biologically ?
and let 's talk about both what i did for my wife , and what i 've done for hundreds of other patients .
first thing for my wife , and the most common thing i hear from my patients , particularly in the 40- to 80 - year - old age group , 70 - year - old age group , is they come in and say , " hey , doc , is n't there just a shock absorber you can put in my knee ?
i 'm not ready for joint replacement . " and so for her , i put in a human meniscus allograft donor right into that [ knee ] joint space .
and [ the allograft ] replaces [ the missing meniscus ] .
and then for that unstable ligament , we put in a human donor ligament to stabilize the knee .
and then for the damaged arthritis on the surface , we did a stem cell paste graft , which we designed in 1991 , to regrow that articular cartilage surface and give it back a smooth surface there .
so here 's my wife 's bad knee on the left , and her just hiking now four months later in aspen , and doing well .
and it works , not just for my wife , but certainly for other patients .
the girl on the video , jen hudak , just won the superpipe in aspen just nine months after having destroyed her knee , as you see in the other image -- and having a paste graft to that knee .
and so we can regrow these surfaces biologically .
so with all this success , why is n't that good enough , you might ask .
well the reason is because there 's not enough donor cycles .
there 's not enough young , healthy people falling off their motorcycle and donating that tissue to us .
and the tissue 's very expensive .
and so that 's not going to be a solution that 's going to get us global with biologic tissue .
but the solution is animal tissue because it 's plentiful , it 's cheap , you can get it from young , healthy tissues ,
but the barrier is immunology .
and the specific barrier is a specific epitope called the galactosyl , or gal epitope .
so if we 're going to transplant animal tissues to people , we have to figure out a way to get rid of that epitope .
so my story in working with animal tissues starts in 1984 .
and i started first with cow achilles tendon , where we would take the cow achilles tendon , which is type - i collagen , strip it of its antigens by degrading it with an acid and detergent wash and forming it into a regeneration template .
we would then take that regeneration template and insert it into the missing meniscus cartilage to regrow that in a patient 's knee .
we 've now done that procedure , and it 's been done worldwide in over 4,000 cases , so it 's an fda - approved and worldwide - accepted way to regrow the meniscus .
and that 's great when i can degrade the tissue .
but what happens for your ligament when i need an intact ligament ?
i ca n't grind it up in a blender .
so in that case , i have to design -- and we designed with uri galili and tom turek -- an enzyme wash to wash away , or strip , those galactosyl epitopes with a specific enzyme .
and we call that a " gal stripping " technique .
what we do is humanize the tissue .
it 's by gal stripping that tissue we humanize it , and then we can put it back into a patient 's knee .
and we 've done that . now we 've taken pig ligament -- young , healthy , big tissue , put it into 10 patients in an fda - approved trial -- and then one of our patients went on to have three canadian masters downhill championships -- on his " pig - lig , " as he calls it . so we know it can work .
and there 's a wide clinical trial of this tissue now pending .
so what about the next step ?
what about getting to a total biologic knee replacement , not just the parts ?
how are we going to revolutionize artificial joint replacement ?
well here 's how we 're going to do it .
so what we 're going to do is take an articular cartilage from a young , healthy pig , strip it of its antigens , load it with your stem cells , then put it back on to that arthritic surface in your knee , tack it on there , have you heal that surface and then create a new biologic surface for your knee .
so that 's our biologic approach right now .
we 're going to rebuild your knee with the parts .
we 're going to resurface it with a completely new surface .
but we have other advantages from the animal kingdom .
there 's a benefit of 400 million years of ambulation .
we can harness those benefits .
we can use thicker , younger , better tissues than you might have injured in your knee , or that you might have when you 're 40 , 50 or 60 .
we can do it as an outpatient procedure .
we can strip that tissue very economically ,
and so this is how we can get biologic knee replacement to go global .
and so welcome to super biologics .
it 's not hardware .
it 's not software .
it 's bioware .
it 's version 2.0 of you . and so with that , coming to a -- coming to an operating theater near you soon , i believe .
thank you very much .
