you should be nice to nerds .
in fact , i 'd go so far as to say , if you do n't already have a nerd in your life , you should get one .
i 'm just saying .
scientists and engineers change the world . i 'd like to tell you about a magical place called darpa where scientists and engineers defy the impossible and refuse to fear failure .
now these two ideas are connected more than you may realize , because when you remove the fear of failure , impossible things suddenly become possible .
if you want to know how , ask yourself this question : what would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail ?
if you really ask yourself this question , you ca n't help but feel uncomfortable .
i feel a little uncomfortable .
because when you ask it , you begin to understand how the fear of failure constrains you , how it keeps us from attempting great things , and life gets dull , amazing things stop happening .
sure , good things happen , but amazing things stop happening .
now i should be clear , i 'm not encouraging failure , i 'm discouraging fear of failure .
because it 's not failure itself that constrains us .
the path to truly new , never - been - done - before things always has failure along the way .
we 're tested .
and in part , that testing feels an appropriate part of achieving something great .
clemenceau said , " life gets interesting when we fail , because it 's a sign that we 've surpassed ourselves . "
in 1895 , lord kelvin declared that heavier - than - air flying machines were impossible .
in october of 1903 , the prevailing opinion of expert aerodynamicists was that maybe in 10 million years we could build an aircraft that would fly .
and two months later on december 17th , orville wright powered the first airplane across a beach in north carolina .
the flight lasted 12 seconds and covered 120 feet .
that was 1903 .
one year later , the next declarations of impossibilities began .
ferdinand foch , a french army general credited with having one of the most original and subtle minds in the french army , said , " airplanes are interesting toys , but of no military value . "
40 years later , aero experts coined the term transonic . they debated , should it have one s or two ?
you see , they were having trouble in this flight regime , and it was n't at all clear that we could fly faster than the speed of sound .
in 1947 , there was no wind tunnel data beyond mach 0.85 .
and yet , on tuesday , october 14th , 1947 , chuck yeager climbed into the cockpit of his bell x - 1 and he flew towards an unknown possibility , and in so doing , he became the first pilot to fly faster than the speed of sound .
six of eight atlas rockets blew up on the pad .
after 11 complete mission failures , we got our first images from space . and on that first flight we got more data than in all u - 2 missions combined .
it took a lot of failures to get there .
since we took to the sky , we have wanted to fly faster and farther .
and to do so , we 've had to believe in impossible things .
and we 've had to refuse to fear failure .
that 's still true today .
today , we do n't talk about flying transonically , or even supersonically , we talk about flying hypersonically -- not mach 2 or mach 3 , mach 20 .
at mach 20 , we can fly from new york to long beach in 11 minutes and 20 seconds .
at that speed , the surface of the airfoil is the temperature of molten steel -- 3,500 degrees fahrenheit -- like a blast furnace .
we are essentially burning the airfoil as we fly it . and we are flying it , or trying to .
darpa 's hypersonic test vehicle is the fastest maneuvering aircraft ever built .
it 's boosted to near - space atop a minotaur iv rocket . now the minotaur iv has too much impulse , so we have to bleed it off by flying the rocket at an 89 degree angle of attack for portions of the trajectory .
that 's an unnatural act for a rocket .
the third stage has a camera .
we call it rocketcam .
and it 's pointed at the hypersonic glider .
this is the actual rocketcam footage from flight one .
now to conceal the shape , we changed the aspect ratio a little bit . but this is what it looks like from the third stage of the rocket looking at the unmanned glider as it heads into the atmosphere back towards earth .
we 've flown twice .
in the first flight , no aerodynamic control of the vehicle .
but we collected more hypersonic flight data than in 30 years of ground - based testing combined . and in the second flight , three minutes of fully - controlled , aerodynamic flight at mach 20 .
we must fly again , because amazing , never - been - done - before things require that you fly .
you ca n't learn to fly at mach 20 unless you fly .
and while there 's no substitute for speed , maneuverability is a very close second .
if a mach 20 glider takes 11 minutes and 20 seconds to get from new york to long beach , a hummingbird would take , well , days .
you see , hummingbirds are not hypersonic , but they are maneuverable .
in fact , the hummingbird is the only bird that can fly backwards .
it can fly up , down , forwards , backwards , even upside - down .
and so if we wanted to fly in this room or places where humans ca n't go , we 'd need an aircraft small enough and maneuverable enough to do so . this is a hummingbird drone .
it can fly in all directions , even backwards .
it can hover and rotate .
this prototype aircraft is equipped with a video camera . it weighs less than one aa battery .
it does not eat nectar .
in 2008 , it flew for a whopping 20 seconds , a year later , two minutes , then six , eventually 11 .
many prototypes crashed -- many .
but there 's no way to learn to fly like a hummingbird unless you fly .
it 's beautiful , is n't it .
wow .
it 's great .
matt is the first ever hummingbird pilot .
failure is part of creating new and amazing things .
we cannot both fear failure and make amazing new things -- like a robot with the stability of a dog on rough terrain , or maybe even ice ; a robot that can run like a cheetah , or climb stairs like a human with the occasional clumsiness of a human .
or perhaps , spider man will one day be gecko man .
a gecko can support its entire body weight with one toe .
one square millimeter of a gecko 's footpad has 14,000 hair - like structures called setae . they are used to help it grip to surfaces using intermolecular forces .
today we can manufacture structures that mimic the hairs of a gecko 's foot .
the result , a four - by - four - inch can support a static load of 660 pounds .
that 's enough to stick six 42 - inch plasma tv 's to your wall , no nails . so much for velcro , right ?
and it 's not just passive structures , it 's entire machines .
this is a spider mite . it 's one millimeter long , but it looks like godzilla next to these micromachines .
in the world of godzilla spider mites , we can make millions of mirrors , each one - fifth the diameter of a human hair ,
moving at hundreds of thousands of times per second to make large screen displays , so that we can watch movies like " godzilla " in high - def . and if we can build machines at that scale , what about eiffel tower - like trusses at the microscale ?
today we are making metals that are lighter than styrofoam , so light they can sit atop a dandelion puff and be blown away with a wisp of air -- so light that you can make a car that two people can lift , but so strong that it has the crash - worthiness of an suv .
from the smallest wisp of air to the powerful forces of nature 's storms .
there are 44 lightning strikes per second around the globe .
each lightning bolt heats the air to 44,000 degrees fahrenheit -- hotter than the surface of the sun.
what if we could use these electromagnetic pulses as beacons , beacons in a moving network of powerful transmitters ?
experiments suggest that lightning could be the next gps .
electrical pulses form the thoughts in our brains .
using a grid the size of your thumb , with 32 electrodes on the surface of his brain , tim uses his thoughts to control an advanced prosthetic arm .
and his thoughts made him reach for katie .
this is the first time a human has controlled a robot with thought alone .
and it is the first time that tim has held katie 's hand in seven years .
that moment mattered to tim and katie , and this green goo may someday matter to you .
this green goo is perhaps the vaccine that could save your life .
it was made in tobacco plants .
tobacco plants can make millions of doses of vaccine in weeks instead of months , and it might just be the first healthy use of tobacco ever .
and if it seems far - fetched that tobacco plants could make people healthy , what about gamers that could solve problems that experts ca n't solve ?
last september , the gamers of foldit solved the three - dimensional structure of the retroviral protease that contributes to aids in rhesus monkeys .
now understanding this structure is very important for developing treatments .
for 15 years , it was unsolved in the scientific community .
the gamers of foldit solved it in 15 days .
now they were able to do so by working together .
they were able to work together because they 're connected by the internet .
and others , also connected to the internet , used it as an instrument of democracy . and together they changed the fate of their nation .
the internet is home to two billion people , or 30 percent of the world 's population .
it allows us to contribute and to be heard as individuals .
it allows us to amplify our voices and our power as a group .
but it too had humble beginnings .
in 1969 , the internet was but a dream , a few sketches on a piece of paper .
and then on october 29th , the first packet - switched message was sent from ucla to sri . the first two letters of the word " login , " that 's all that made it through -- an l and an o -- and then a buffer overflow crashed the system .
two letters , an l and an o , now a worldwide force .
so who are these scientists and engineers at a magical place called darpa ?
they are nerds , and they are heroes among us .
they challenge existing perspectives at the edges of science and under the most demanding of conditions .
they remind us that we can change the world if we defy the impossible and we refuse to fear failure .
they remind us that we all have nerd power .
sometimes we just forget .
you see , there was a time when you were n't afraid of failure , when you were a great artist or a great dancer and you could sing , you were good at math , you could build things , you were an astronaut , an adventurer , jacques cousteau , you could jump higher , run faster , kick harder than anyone .
you believed in impossible things and you were fearless .
you were totally and completely in touch with your inner superhero .
scientists and engineers can indeed change the world .
so can you .
you were born to .
so go ahead , ask yourself , what would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail ?
now i want to say , this is not easy . it 's hard to hold onto this feeling , really hard .
i guess in some way , i sort of believe it 's supposed to be hard .
doubt and fear always creep in .
we think someone else , someone smarter than us , someone more capable , someone with more resources will solve that problem .
but there is n't anyone else ; there 's just you .
and if we 're lucky , in that moment , someone steps into that doubt and fear , takes a hand and says , " let me help you believe . "
jason harley did that for me .
jason started at darpa on march 18th , 2010 .
he was with our transportation team .
i saw jason nearly every day , sometimes twice a day .
and more so than most , he saw the highs and the lows , the celebrations and the disappointments . and on one particularly dark day for me , jason sat down and he wrote an email .
he was encouraging , but firm .
and when he hit send , he probably did n't realize what a difference it would make .
it mattered to me .
in that moment and still today when i doubt , when i feel afraid , when i need to reconnect with that feeling , i remember his words , they were so powerful .
text : " there is only time enough to iron your cape and back to the skies for you . "
♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ ♫ superhero , superhero . ♫ voice : because that 's what being a superhero is all about .
rd : " there is only time enough to iron your cape and back to the skies for you . "
and remember , be nice to nerds .
thank you . thank you .
chris anderson : regina , thank you .
i have a couple of questions .
so that glider of yours , the mach 20 glider , the first one , no control , it ended up in the pacific i think somewhere .
rd : yeah , yeah . it did .
yeah , it also went into the pacific .
we did n't fly it into the pacific .
no , there are multiple portions of the trajectory that are demanding in terms of really flying at that speed .
and so in the second flight , we were able to get three minutes of fully aerodynamic control of the vehicle before we lost it .
ca : i imagine you 're not planning to open up to passenger service from new york to long beach anytime soon .
rd : it might be a little warm .
ca : what do you picture that glider being used for ?
rd : well our responsibility is to develop the technology for this .
how it 's ultimately used will be determined by the military .
now the purpose of the vehicle though , the purpose of the technology , is to be able to reach anywhere in the world in less than 60 minutes .
ca : and to carry a payload of more than a few pounds ? like what 's the payload it could carry ?
rd : well i do n't think we ultimately know what it will be , right .
we 've got to fly it first .
ca : but not necessarily just a camera ?
rd : no , not necessarily just a camera .
ca : it 's amazing .
the hummingbird ?
rd : yeah ?
ca : i 'm curious , you started your beautiful sequence on flight with a plane kind of trying to flap its wings and failing horribly , and there have n't been that many planes built since that flap wings .
why did we think that this was the time to go biomimicry and copy a hummingbird ?
is n't that a very expensive solution for a small maneuverable flying object ?
rd : so i mean , in part , we wondered if it was possible to do it .
and you have to revisit these questions over time .
the folks at aerovironment tried 300 or more different wing designs , 12 different forms of the avionics .
it took them 10 full prototypes to get something that would actually fly .
but there 's something really interesting about a flying machine that looks like something you 'd recognize .
so we often talk about stealth as a means for avoiding any type of sensing , but when things looks just natural , you also do n't see them .
ca : ah . so it 's not necessarily just the performance .
it 's partly the look . it 's actually , " look at that cute hummingbird flying into my headquarters . "
because i think , as well as the awe of looking at that , i 'm sure some people here are thinking , technology catches up so quick , how long is it before some crazed geek with a little remote control flies one through a window of the white house ?
i mean , do you worry about the pandora 's box issue here ?
rd : well look , our singular mission is the creation and prevention of strategic surprise .
that 's what we do .
it would be inconceivable
for us to do that work if we did n't make people excited and uncomfortable with the things that we do at the same time .
it 's just the nature of what we do .
now our responsibility is to push that edge .
and we have to be , of course , mindful and responsible of how the technology is developed and ultimately used , but we ca n't simply close our eyes and pretend that it is n't advancing ; it 's advancing .
ca : i mean , you 're clearly a really inspiring leader .
and you persuade people to go to these great feats of invention , but at a personal level , in a way i ca n't imagine doing your job .
do you wake up in the night sometimes , just asking questions about the possibly unintended consequences of your team 's brilliance ?
rd : sure . i think you could n't be human if you did n't ask those questions .
ca : how do you answer them ?
rd : well i do n't always have answers for them , right .
i think that we learn as time goes on .
my job is one of the most exhilarating jobs you could have .
i work with some of the most amazing people .
and with that exhilaration , comes a really deep sense of responsibility .
and so you have on the one hand this tremendous lift of what 's possible and this tremendous seriousness of what it means . ca : regina , that was jaw - dropping , as they say .
thank you so much for coming to ted .
