as a magician , i try to create images that make people stop and think .
i also try to challenge myself to do things that doctors say are not possible .
i was buried alive in new york city in a coffin , buried alive in a coffin in april , 1999 , for a week .
i lived there with nothing but water .
and it ended up being so much fun that i decided i could pursue doing more of these things .
the next one is i froze myself in a block of ice for three days and three nights in new york city .
that one was way more difficult than i had expected .
the one after that , i stood on top of a hundred foot pillar for 36 hours . i began to hallucinate so hard that the buildings that were behind me started to look like big animal heads .
so , next i went to london .
in london i lived in a glass box for 44 days with nothing but water .
it was , for me , one of the most difficult things i 'd ever done , but it was also the most beautiful .
there was so many skeptics , especially the press in london , that they started flying cheeseburgers on helicopters around my box to tempt me .
so , i felt very validated when the new england journal of medicine actually used the research for science .
my next pursuit was i wanted to see how long i could go without breathing , like how long i could survive with nothing , not even air .
i did n't realize that it would become the most amazing journey of my life .
as a young magician i was obsessed with houdini and his underwater challenges .
so , i began , early on , competing against the other kids , seeing how long i could stay underwater
while they went up and down to breathe , you know , five times , while i stayed under on one breath .
by the time i was a teenager i was able to hold my breath for three minutes and 30 seconds .
i would later find out that was houdini 's personal record . in 1987 i heard of a story about a boy that fell through ice and was trapped under a river .
he was underneath , not breathing for 45 minutes .
when the rescue workers came they resuscitated him and there was no brain damage .
his core temperature had dropped to 77 degrees .
as a magician , i think everything is possible .
and i think if something is done by one person it can be done by others .
i started to think , if the boy could survive without breathing for that long , there must be a way that i could do it .
so , i met with a top neurosurgeon .
and i asked him , how long is it possible to go without breathing , like how long could i go without air ?
and he said to me that anything over six minutes you have a serious risk of hypoxic brain damage .
so , i took that as a challenge , basically .
my first try , i figured that i could do something similar , and i created a water tank , and i filled it with ice and freezing cold water .
and i stayed inside of that water tank hoping my core temperature would start to drop .
and i was shivering . in my first attempt to hold my breath i could n't even last a minute .
so , i realized that was completely not going to work .
so , i went to talk to a doctor friend , and i asked him how could i do that ?
" i want to hold my breath for a really long time . how could it be done ? "
and he said , " david , you 're a magician , create the illusion of not breathing , it will be much easier . "
so , he came up with this idea of creating a rebreather , with a co 2 scrubber , which was basically a tube from home depot , with a balloon duct - taped to it , that he thought we could put inside of me , and somehow be able to circulate the air and rebreathe with this thing in me .
this is a little hard to watch .
but this is that attempt .
so , that clearly was n't going to work .
then i actually started thinking about liquid breathing .
there is a chemical that 's called perflubron . and it 's so high in oxygen levels that in theory you could breathe it .
so , i got my hands on that chemical , filled the sink up with it , and stuck my face in the sink and tried to breathe that in , which was really impossible .
it 's basically like trying to breathe , as a doctor said , while having an elephant standing on your chest .
so , that idea disappeared .
then i started thinking , would it be possible to hook up a heart / lung bypass machine and have a surgery where it was a tube going into my artery , and then appear to not breathe while they were oxygenating my blood ?
which was another insane idea , obviously .
then i thought about the craziest idea of all the ideas : to actually do it .
to actually try to hold my breath past the point that doctors would consider you brain dead .
so , i started researching into pearl divers .
you know , because they go down for four minutes on one breath .
and when i was researching pearl divers , i found the world of free - diving .
it was the most amazing thing that i ever discovered , pretty much .
there is many different aspects to free - diving .
there is depth records , where people go as deep as they can .
and then there is static apnea .
that 's holding your breath as long as you can in one place without moving .
that was the one that i studied .
the first thing that i learned is when you 're holding your breath you should never move at all ; that wastes energy .
and that depletes oxygen , and it builds up co 2 in your blood . so , i learned never to move .
and i learned how to slow my heart rate down .
i had to remain perfectly still and just relax and think that i was n't in my body ,
and just control that .
and then i learned how to purge .
purging is basically hyperventilating .
you blow in and out ...
you do that , you get lightheaded , you get tingling .
and you 're really ridding your body of co 2 .
so , when you hold your breath it 's infinitely easier .
then i learned that you have to take a huge breath , and just hold and relax and never let any air out , and just hold and relax through all the pain .
every morning , this is for months , i would wake up and the first thing that i would do is i would hold my breath
for , out of 52 minutes , so , basically what that means is i would purge , i 'd breath really hard for a minute . and i would hold , immediately after , for five and half minutes .
then i would breath again for a minute , purging as hard as i can , then immediately after that i would hold again for five and half minutes .
i would repeat this process eight times in a row .
out of 52 minutes you 're only breathing for eight minutes .
at the end of that you 're completely fried , your brain .
you feel like you 're walking around in a daze .
and you have these awful headaches .
basically , i 'm not the best person to talk to when i 'm doing that stuff .
i started learning about the world - record holder .
his name is tom sietas .
and this guy is perfectly built for holding his breath .
he 's six foot four . he 's 160 pounds .
and his total lung capacity is twice the size of an average person .
i 'm six foot one , and fat .
we 'll say big - boned .
i had to drop 50 pounds in three months .
so , everything that i put into my body i considered as medicine .
every bit of food was exactly what it was for its nutritional value .
i ate really small controlled portions throughout the day .
and i started to really adapt my body .
the thinner i was , the longer i was able to hold my breath .
and by eating so well and training so hard , my resting heart - rate dropped to 38 beats per minute .
which is lower than most olympic athletes .
in four months of training i was able to hold my breath for over seven minutes .
i wanted to try holding my breath everywhere .
i wanted to try it in the most extreme situations to see if i could slow my heart rate down under duress .
i decided that i was going to break the world record live on prime - time television .
the world record was eight minutes and 58 seconds , held by tom sietas , that guy with the whale lungs i told you about .
i assumed that i could put a water tank at lincoln center and if i stayed there a week not eating , i would get comfortable in that situation and i would slow my metabolism , which i was sure would help me hold my breath longer than i had been able to do it .
i was completely wrong .
i entered the sphere a week before the scheduled air date .
and i thought everything seemed to be on track .
two days before my big breath hold attempt , for the record , the producers of my television special thought that just watching somebody holding their breath , and almost drowning , is too boring for television .
so , i had to add handcuffs , while holding my breath , to escape from .
this was a critical mistake .
because of the movement i was wasting oxygen .
and by seven minutes i had gone into these awful convulsions .
by 7:08 i started to black out .
and by seven minutes and 30 seconds they had to pull my body out and bring me back .
i had failed on every level .
so , naturally , the only way out of the slump that i could think of was , i decided to call oprah .
i told her that i wanted to up the ante and hold my breath longer than any human being ever had .
this was a different record . this was a pure o 2 static apnea record that guinness had set the world record at 13 minutes .
so , basically you breath pure o 2 first , oxygenating your body , flushing out co 2 , and you are able to hold much longer .
i realized that my real competition was the beaver .
in january of '08 oprah gave me four months to prepare and train .
so , i would sleep in a hypoxic tent every night .
a hypoxic tent is a tent that simulates altitude at 15,000 feet .
so , it 's like base camp everest .
what that does is , you start building up the red blood cell count in your body , which helps you carry oxygen better .
every morning , again , after getting out of that tent your brain is completely wiped out .
my first attempt on pure o 2 , i was able to go up to 15 minutes .
so , it was a pretty big success .
the neurosurgeon pulled me out of the water because in his mind , at 15 minutes your brain is done , you 're brain dead .
so , he pulled me up , and i was fine .
there was one person there that was definitely not impressed .
it was my ex - girlfriend . while i was breaking the record underwater for the first time , she was sifting through my blackberry , checking all my messages .
my brother had a picture of it . it is really ...
i then announced that i was going to go for sietas ' record , publicly .
and what he did in response , is he went on regis and kelly , and broke his old record .
then his main competitor went out and broke his record .
so , he suddenly pushed the record up to 16 minutes and 32 seconds .
which was three minutes longer than i had prepared .
you know , it was longer than the record .
now , i wanted to get the science times to document this .
i wanted to get them to do a piece on it .
so , i did what any person seriously pursuing scientific advancement would do .
i walked into the new york times offices and did card tricks to everybody .
so , i do n't know if it was the magic or the lore of the cayman islands , but john tierney flew down and did a piece on the seriousness of breath - holding .
while he was there i tried to impress him , of course .
and i did a dive down to 160 feet , which is basically the height of a 16 story building , and as i was coming up , i blacked out underwater , which is really dangerous ; that 's how you drown .
luckily kirk had seen me and he swam over and pulled me up .
so , i started full focus . i completely trained to get my breath hold time up for what i needed to do .
but there was no way to prepare for the live television aspect of it , being on oprah .
but in practice , i would do it face down , floating on the pool . but for tv they wanted me to be upright so they could see my face , basically .
the other problem was the suit was so buoyant that they had to strap my feet in to keep me from floating up .
so , i had to use my legs to hold my feet into the straps that were loose , which was a real problem for me .
that made me extremely nervous , raising the heart rate .
then , what they also did was , which we never did before , is there was a heart - rate monitor . and it was right next to the sphere .
so , every time my heart would beat i 'd hear the beep - beep - beep - beep , you know , the ticking , really loud .
which was making me more nervous .
and there is no way to slow my heart rate down .
so , normally i would start at 38 beats per minute , and while holding my breath it would drop to 12 beats per minute , which is pretty unusual .
this time it started at 120 beats , and it never went down .
i spent the first five minutes underwater desperately trying to slow my heart rate down .
i was just sitting there thinking , " i 've got to slow this down . i 'm going to fail , i 'm going to fail . "
and i was getting more nervous .
and the heart rate just kept going up and up , all the way up to 150 beats .
basically it 's the same thing that created my downfall at lincoln center .
it was a waste of o 2 .
when i made it to the halfway mark , at eight minutes , i was 100 percent certain that i was not going to be able to make this .
there was no way for me to do it .
so , i figured , oprah had dedicated an hour to doing this breath hold thing , if i had cracked early it would be a whole show about how depressed i am. so , i figured i 'm better off just fighting and staying there until i black out , at least then they can pull me out and take care of me and all that .
i kept pushing to 10 minutes . at 10 minutes you start getting all these really strong tingling sensations in your fingers and toes .
and i knew that that was blood shunting , when the blood rushes away from your extremities to provide oxygen to your vital organs .
at 11 minutes i started feeling throbbing sensations in my legs , and my lips started to feel really strange .
at minute 12 i started to have ringing in my ears , and i started to feel my arm going numb .
and i 'm a hypochondriac , and i remember arm numb means heart attack .
so , i started to really get really paranoid .
then at 13 minutes , maybe because of the hypochondria . i started feeling pains all over my chest .
it was awful .
at 14 minutes , i had these awful contractions , like this urge to breathe .
at 15 minutes i was suffering major o 2 deprivation to the heart .
and i started having ischemia to the heart .
my heartbeat would go from 120 , to 50 , to 150 , to 40 , to 20 , to 150 again .
it would skip a beat .
it would start . it would stop . and i felt all this .
and i was sure that i was going to have a heart attack .
so , at 16 minutes what i did is i slid my feet out because i knew that if i did go out , if i did have a heart attack , they 'd have to jump into the binding and take my feet out
before pulling me up . so , i was really nervous .
so , i let my feet out , and i started floating to the top . and i did n't take my head out .
but i was just floating there waiting for my heart to stop , just waiting .
they had doctors with the " pst , " you know , so , sitting there waiting .
and then suddenly i hear screaming .
and i think that there is some weird thing -- that i had died or something had happened .
and then i realized that i had made it to 16:32 .
so , with the energy of everybody that was there i decided to keep pushing .
and i went to 17 minutes and four seconds .
as though that was n't enough , what i did immediately after is i went to quest labs and had them take every blood sample that they could to test for everything and to see where my levels were , so the doctors could use it , once again .
i also did n't want anybody to question it .
i had the world record and i wanted to make sure it was legitimate .
so , i get to new york city the next day , and this kid walks up to me -- i 'm walking out of the apple store -- this kid walks up to me he 's like , " yo , d ! "
i 'm like " yeah ? "
he said , " if you really held your breath that long , why 'd you come out of the water dry ? "
i was like " what ? "
and that 's my life . so ...
as a magician i try to show things to people that seem impossible .
and i think magic , whether i 'm holding my breath or shuffling a deck of cards , is pretty simple .
it 's practice , it 's training , and it 's -- it 's practice , it 's training and experimenting , while pushing through the pain to be the best that i can be .
and that 's what magic is to me , so , thank you .
