in my industry , we believe that images can change the world .
okay , we 're naive , we 're bright - eyed and bushy - tailed .
the truth is that we know that the images themselves do n't change the world , but we 're also aware that , since the beginning of photography , images have provoked reactions in people , and those reactions have caused change to happen . so let 's begin with a group of images .
i 'd be extremely surprised if you did n't recognize many or most of them .
they 're best described as iconic : so iconic , perhaps , they 're cliches .
in fact , they 're so well - known that you might even recognize them in a slightly or somewhat different form .
but i think we 're looking for something more .
we 're looking for something more .
we 're looking for images that shine an uncompromising light on crucial issues , images that transcend borders , that transcend religions , images that provoke us to step up and do something -- in other words , to act .
well , this image you 've all seen .
it changed our view of the physical world .
we had never seen our planet from this perspective before .
many people credit a lot of the birth of the environmental movement to our seeing the planet like this for the first time -- its smallness , its fragility .
forty years later , this group , more than most , are well aware of the destructive power that our species can wield over our environment .
and at last , we appear to be doing something about it .
this destructive power takes many different forms .
for example , these images taken by brent stirton in the congo . these gorillas were murdered , some would even say crucified , and unsurprisingly , they sparked international outrage . most recently , we 've been tragically reminded of the destructive power of nature itself with the recent earthquake in haiti . well , i think what is far worse is man 's destructive power over man . samuel pisar , an auschwitz survivor , said , and i 'll quote him , " the holocaust teaches us that nature , even in its cruelest moments , is benign in comparison with man , when he loses his moral compass and his reason . "
there 's another kind of crucifixion .
the horrifying images from abu ghraib as well as the images from guantanamo had a profound impact .
the publication of those images , as opposed to the images themselves , caused a government to change its policies .
some would argue that it is those images that did more to fuel the insurgency in iraq than virtually any other single act .
furthermore , those images forever removed the so - called moral high ground of the occupying forces .
let 's go back a little .
in the 1960s and 1970s , the vietnam war was basically shown in america 's living rooms day in , day out .
news photos brought people face to face with the victims of the war : a little girl burned by napalm , a student killed by the national guard at kent state university in ohio during a protest .
in fact , these images became the voices of protest themselves .
now , images have power to shed light of understanding on suspicion , ignorance , and in particular -- i 've given a lot of talks on this but i 'll just show one image -- the issue of hiv / aids .
in the 1980s , the stigmatization of people with the disease to even discussing or addressing it .
a simple act , in 1987 , of the most famous woman in the world , the princess of wales , touching an hiv / aids infected baby did a great deal , especially in europe , to stop that .
she , better than most , knew the power of an image .
so when we are confronted by a powerful image , we all have a choice :
we can look away , or we can address the image .
thankfully , when these photos appeared in the guardian in 1998 , they put a lot of focus and attention and , in the end , a lot of money towards the sudan famine relief efforts .
did the images change the world ?
no , but they had a major impact .
images often push us to question our core beliefs and our responsibilities to each other .
we all saw those images after katrina , and i think for millions of people they had a very strong impact . and i think it 's very unlikely that they were far from the minds of americans when they went to vote in november 2008 .
unfortunately , some very important images are deemed too graphic or disturbing for us to see them .
i 'll show you one photo here , and it 's a photo by eugene richards of an iraq war veteran from an extraordinary piece of work , which has never been published , called war is personal . but images do n't need to be graphic in order to remind us of the tragedy of war .
john moore set up this photo at arlington cemetery .
after all the tense moments of conflict in all the conflict zones of the world , there 's one photograph from a much quieter place that haunts me still , much more than the others .
ansel adams said , and i 'm going to disagree with him , " you do n't take a photograph , you make it . "
in my view , it 's not the photographer who makes the photo , it 's you .
we bring to each image our own values , our own belief systems , and as a result of that , the image resonates with us .
my company has 70 million images .
i have one image in my office .
here it is .
i hope that the next time you see an image that sparks something in you , you 'll better understand why , and i know that speaking to this audience , you 'll definitely do something about it .
and thank you to all the photographers .
