every presentation needs this slide in it .
it 's beautiful , is n't it ?
do you see ?
all the points , all the lines -- it 's incredible .
it is the network ;
and in my case , the network has been important in media , because i get to connect to people .
is n't it amazing ?
through that , i connect to people .
and the way that i 've been doing it has been multifaceted .
for example , i get people to dress up their vacuum cleaners .
i put together projects like earth sandwich , where i ask people to try and simultaneously place two pieces of bread perfectly opposite each other on the earth .
and people started laying bread in tribute , and eventually a team was able to do it between new zealand and spain .
it 's pretty incredible -- the video 's online .
connecting to people in projects like youngmenowme for example .
in youngmenowme , the audience was asked to find a childhood photograph of themselves and restage it as an adult .
this is the same person -- top photo , james , bottom photo , [ jennifer ] .
poignant .
this was a mother 's day gift .
particularly creepy .
my favorite of these photos , which i could n't find , is there 's a picture of a 30 year - old woman or so with a little baby on her lap , and the next photo is a 220 - lb man with a tiny , little old lady peaking over his shoulder .
but this project changed the way that i thought about connecting to people .
this is project called ray .
and what happened was i was sent this piece of audio and had no idea who generated the audio .
somebody said , " you have to listen to this . "
and this is what came to me .
recording : hi , my name is ray , and on yesterday my daughter called me because she was stressed out because of things that were going on on her job that she felt was quite unfair .
being quite disturbed , she called for comfort , and i did n't really know what to tell her , because we have to deal with so much mess in our society .
so i was led to write this song just for her , just to give her some encouragement while dealing with stress and pressures on her job .
and i figured i 'd put it on the internet for all employees under stress to help you better deal with what you 're going through on your job .
here 's how the song goes . ♫ i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ ♫ oh , i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ ♫ oh , if you do n't leave me alone , ♫ ♫ you gonna have to send me home ♫ ♫ ' cause i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ now you might not be able to sing that out loud , but you can hum it to yourself , and you know what the words are .
and let it give you some strength to get the next few moments on your job .
all right . stay strong . peace .
ze frank : so -- yeah .
no , no , no , shush . we 've got to go quickly .
so i was so moved by this --
this is incredible . this was connecting , right .
this was , at a distance , realizing that someone was feeling something , wanting to affect them in a particular way , using media to do it , putting it online and realizing that there was a greater impact .
this was incredible ; this is what i wanted to do .
so the first thing i thought of is we have to thank him .
and i asked my audience , i said , " listen to this piece of audio .
we have to remix it . he 's got a great voice .
it 's actually in the key of b flat .
and have to do something with it . "
hundreds of remixes came back -- lots of different attempts .
one stood out in particular .
it was done by a guy named goose .
remix : ♫ i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ ♫ oh , i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ ♫ oh , if you do n't leave me alone , ♫ ♫ you gonna have to send me home ♫ ♫ cuz i 'm about to whip somebody 's ass ♫ ♫ i 'm about to whip some ♫ -- zf : great , so it was incredible .
that song -- thank you .
so that song , somebody told me that it was at a baseball game in kansas city .
in the end , it was one of the top downloads on a whole bunch of music streaming services .
and so i said , " let 's put this together in an album . "
and the audience came together , and they designed an album cover .
and i said , " if you put it all on this , i 'm going to deliver it to him , if you can figure out who this person is , " because all i had was his name -- ray -- and this little piece of audio and the fact that his daughter was upset .
in two weeks , they found him .
i received and email and it said , " hi , i 'm ray .
i heard you were looking for me . "
and i was like , " yeah , ray .
it 's been an interesting two weeks . "
and so i flew to st. louis and met ray , and he 's a preacher --
among other things .
so but anyways , here 's the thing -- is it reminds me of this , which is a sign that you see in amsterdam on every street corner .
and it 's sort of a metaphor for me for the virtual world .
i look at this photo , and he seems really interested in what 's going on with that button , but it does n't seem like he is really that interested in crossing the street .
and it makes me think of this .
on street corners everywhere , people are looking at their cell phones , and it 's easy to dismiss this as some sort of bad trend in human culture .
but the truth is life is being lived there .
when they smile -- right , you 've seen people stop -- all of a sudden , life is being lived there , somewhere up in that weird , dense network .
and this is it , right , to feel and be felt .
it 's the fundamental force that we 're all after .
we can build all sorts of environments to make it a little bit easier , but ultimately , what we 're trying to do is really connect with one other person .
and that 's not always going to happen in physical spaces .
it 's also going to now happen in virtual spaces , and we have to get better at figuring that out .
i think , of the people that build all this technology in the network , a lot of them are n't very good at connecting with people .
this is kind of like something i used to do in third grade .
so here 's a series of projects over the last few years where i 've been inspired by trying to figure out how to really facilitate close connection .
sometimes they 're very , very simple things .
a childhood walk , which is a project where i ask people to remember a walk that they used to take as a child over and over again that was sort of meaningless -- like on the route to the bus stop , to a neighbor 's house , and take it inside of google streetview .
and i promise you , if you take that walk inside google streetview , you come to a moment where something comes back and hits you in the face .
and i collected those moments -- the photos inside google streetview and the memories , specifically .
" our conversation started with me saying , ' i 'm bored , ' and her replying , ' when i 'm bored i eat pretzels . ' i remember this distinctly because it came up a lot . "
" right after he told me and my brother he was going to be separating from my mom , i remember walking to a convenience store and getting a cherry cola . "
" they used some of the morbidly artist footage , a close - up of chad 's shoes in the middle of the highway .
i guess the shoes came off when he was hit .
he slept over at my house once , and he left his pillow .
it had ' chad ' written in magic marker on it .
he died long after he left the pillow at my house , but we never got around to returning it . "
sometimes they 're a little bit more abstract .
this is pain pack .
right after september 11th , last year , i was thinking about pain and the way that we disperse it , the way that we excise it from our bodies .
so what i did is i opened up a hotline -- a hotline where people could leave voicemails of their pain , not necessarily related to that event .
and people called in and left messages like this . recording : okay , here 's something .
i 'm not alone , and i am loved .
i 'm really fortunate .
but sometimes i feel really lonely .
and when i feel that way even the smallest act of kindness can make me cry .
like even people in convenience stores saying , " have a nice day , " when they 're accidentally looking me in the eye .
zf : so what i did was i took those voicemails , and with their permission , converted them to mp 3s and distributed them to sound editors who created short sounds using just those voicemails .
and those were then distributed to djs who have made hundreds of songs using that source material .
we do n't have time to play much of it .
you can look at it online .
" from 52 to 48 with love " was a project around the time of the last election cycle , where mccain and obama both , in their speeches after the election , talked about reconciliation , and i was like , " what the hell does that look like ? "
so i thought , " well let 's just give it a try .
let 's have people hold up signs about reconciliation . "
and so some really nice things came together .
" i voted blue . i voted red .
together , for our future . "
these are very , very cute little things right .
some came from the winning party .
" dear 48 , i promise to listen to you , to fight for you , to respect you always . "
some came from the party who had just lost .
" from a 48 to a 52 , may your party 's leadership be as classy as you , but i doubt it . "
but the truth was that as this start becoming popular , a couple rightwing blogs and some message boards apparently found it to be a little patronizing , which i could also see .
and so i started getting amazing amounts of hate mail , death threats even .
and one guy in particular kept on writing me these pretty awful messages , and he was dressed as batman .
and he said , " i 'm dressed as batman to hide my identity . "
just in case i thought the real batman was coming after me ;
which actually made me feel a little better --
like , " phew , it 's not him . "
so what i did -- unfortunately , i was harboring all this kind of awful experience and this pain inside of me , and it started to eat away at my psyche .
and i was protecting the project from it , i realized . i was protecting it --
i did n't want this special , little group of photographs to get sullied in some way .
so what i did , i took all those emails , and i put them together into something called angrigami , which was an origami template made out of this sort of vile stuff .
and i asked people to send me beautiful things made out of the angrigami .
but this was the emotional moment .
one of my viewer 's uncles died on a particular day and he chose to commemorate it with a piece of hate .
it 's amazing .
the last thing i 'm going to tell you about is a series of projects called songs you already know , where the idea was , i was trying to figure out to address particular kinds of emotions with group projects .
so one of them was fairly straightforward .
a guy said that his daughter got scared at night and could i write a song for her , his daughter .
and i said , " oh yeah , i 'll try to write a mantra that she can sing to herself to help herself go to sleep . "
and this was " scared . "
♫ this is a song that i sing when i 'm scared of something ♫ ♫ i do n't know why but it helps me get over it ♫ ♫ the words of the song just move me along ♫ ♫ and somehow i get over it ♫ ♫ at least i do n't suck at life ♫ ♫ i keep on trying despite ♫ ♫ at least i do n't suck at life ♫ ♫ i keep on trying despite ♫ ♫ this is a song that i sing when i 'm scared of something ♫ okay , so i wrote that song , right . thank you .
so the nice thing was is he walked by his daughter 's room at some point , and she actually was singing that song to herself .
so i was like , " awesome . this is great . "
and then i got this email . and there 's a little bit of a back story to this .
and i do n't have much time .
but the idea was that at one point i did a project called facebook me equals you , where i wanted to experience what it was like to live as another person .
so i asked for people 's usernames and passwords to be sent to me .
and i got a lot , like 30 in a half an hour .
and i shut that part down .
and i chose two people to be , and i asked them to send me descriptions of how to act as them on facebook .
one person sent me a very detailed description ;
the other person did n't .
and the person who did n't , it turned out , had just moved to a new city and taken on a new job .
so , you know , people were writing me and saying , " how 's your new job ? "
i was like , " i do n't know .
did n't know i had one . "
but anyway , this same person , laura , ended up emailing me a little bit after that project .
and i felt badly for not having done a good job .
and she said , " i 'm really anxious , i just moved to a new town , i have this new job , and i 've just had this incredible amount of anxiety . "
so she had seen the " scared " song and wondered if i could do something .
so i asked her , " what does it feel like when you feel this way ? "
and she wrote a sort of descriptive set of what it felt like to have had this anxiety .
and so what i decided to do .
i said , " okay , i 'll think about it . "
and so quietly in the background , i started sending people this .
♫ hey ♫ ♫ you 're okay ♫ ♫ you 'll be fine ♫ so i asked people whether they had basic audio capabilities , just so they could sing along to the song with headphones on , so i could just get their voices back .
and this is the kind of thing that i got back .
recording : ♫ hey ♫ ♫ you 're okay ♫ ♫ you 'll be fine ♫ zf : so that 's one of the better ones , really .
but what 's awesome is , as i started getting more and more and more of them , all of a sudden i had 30 , 40 voices from around the world .
and when you put them together , something magical happens , something absolutely incredible happens , and all of a sudden i get a chorus from around the world .
and what was really great is , i 'm putting all this work together in the background , and laura sent me a follow - up email because a good month had passed by .
and she said , " i know you 've forgotten about me .
i just want to say thanks for even considering it . "
and then a few days later i sent her this .
