a tourist is backpacking through the highlands of scotland , and he stops at a pub to get a drink .
and the only people in there is a bartender and an old man nursing a beer .
and he orders a pint , and they sit in silence for a while .
and suddenly the old man turns to him and goes , " you see this bar ?
i built this bar with my bare hands from the finest wood in the county .
gave it more love and care than my own child .
but do they call me macgregor the bar builder ? no. "
points out the window .
" you see that stone wall out there ?
i built that stone wall with my bare hands .
found every stone , placed them just so through the rain and the cold .
but do they call me macgregor the stone wall builder ? no. "
points out the window .
" you see that pier on the lake out there ?
i built that pier with my bare hands .
drove the pilings against the tide of the sand , plank by plank .
but do they call me macgregor the pier builder ? no.
but you fuck one goat ... " storytelling -- is joke telling .
it 's knowing your punchline , your ending , knowing that everything you 're saying , from the first sentence to the last , is leading to a singular goal , and ideally confirming some truth that deepens our understandings of who we are as human beings .
we all love stories .
we 're born for them .
stories affirm who we are .
we all want affirmations that our lives have meaning .
and nothing does a greater affirmation than when we connect through stories .
it can cross the barriers of time , past , present and future , and allow us to experience the similarities between ourselves and through others , real and imagined .
the children 's television host mr. rogers always carried in his wallet a quote from a social worker that said , " frankly , there is n't anyone you could n't learn to love once you 've heard their story . "
and the way i like to interpret that is probably the greatest story commandment , which is " make me care " -- please , emotionally , intellectually , aesthetically , just make me care .
we all know what it 's like to not care .
you 've gone through hundreds of tv channels , just switching channel after channel , and then suddenly you actually stop on one .
it 's already halfway over , but something 's caught you and you 're drawn in and you care .
that 's not by chance , that 's by design .
so it got me thinking , what if i told you my history was story , how i was born for it , how i learned along the way this subject matter ?
and to make it more interesting , we 'll start from the ending and we 'll go to the beginning .
and so if i were going to give you the ending of this story , it would go something like this : and that 's what ultimately led me to speaking to you here at ted about story .
and the most current story lesson that i 've had was completing the film i 've just done this year in 2012 .
the film is " john carter . " it 's based on a book called " the princess of mars , " which was written by edgar rice burroughs .
and edgar rice burroughs actually put himself as a character inside this movie , and as the narrator .
and he 's summoned by his rich uncle , john carter , to his mansion with a telegram saying , " see me at once . "
but once he gets there , he 's found out that his uncle has mysteriously passed away and been entombed in a mausoleum on the property .
butler : you wo n't find a keyhole .
thing only opens from the inside .
he insisted , no embalming , no open coffin , no funeral .
you do n't acquire the kind of wealth your uncle commanded by being like the rest of us , huh ?
come , let 's go inside .
as : what this scene is doing , and it did in the book , is it 's fundamentally making a promise .
it 's making a promise to you that this story will lead somewhere that 's worth your time .
and that 's what all good stories should do at the beginning , is they should give you a promise .
you could do it an infinite amount of ways .
sometimes it 's as simple as " once upon a time ... " these carter books always had edgar rice burroughs as a narrator in it .
and i always thought it was such a fantastic device .
it 's like a guy inviting you around the campfire , or somebody in a bar saying , " here , let me tell you a story .
it did n't happen to me , it happened to somebody else , but it 's going to be worth your time . "
a well told promise is like a pebble being pulled back in a slingshot and propels you forward through the story to the end .
in 2008 , i pushed all the theories that i had on story at the time to the limits of my understanding on this project .
♫ and that is all ♫ ♫ that love 's about ♫ ♫ and we 'll recall ♫ ♫ when time runs out ♫ ♫ that it only ♫ as : storytelling without dialogue .
it 's the purest form of cinematic storytelling .
it 's the most inclusive approach you can take .
it confirmed something i really had a hunch on , is that the audience actually wants to work for their meal .
they just do n't want to know that they 're doing that .
that 's your job as a storyteller , is to hide the fact that you 're making them work for their meal .
we 're born problem solvers .
we 're compelled to deduce and to deduct , because that 's what we do in real life .
it 's this well - organized absence of information that draws us in .
there 's a reason that we 're all attracted to an infant or a puppy .
it 's not just that they 're damn cute ; it 's because they ca n't completely express what they 're thinking and what their intentions are .
and it 's like a magnet .
we ca n't stop ourselves from wanting to complete the sentence and fill it in .
i first started really understanding this storytelling device when i was writing with bob peterson on " finding nemo . "
and we would call this the unifying theory of two plus two .
make the audience put things together .
do n't give them four , give them two plus two .
the elements you provide and the order you place them in is crucial to whether you succeed or fail at engaging the audience .
editors and screenwriters have known this all along .
it 's the invisible application that holds our attention to story .
i do n't mean to make it sound like this is an actual exact science , it 's not .
that 's what 's so special about stories , they 're not a widget , they are n't exact .
stories are inevitable , if they 're good , but they 're not predictable .
i took a seminar in this year with an acting teacher named judith weston .
and i learned a key insight to character .
she believed that all well - drawn characters have a spine .
and the idea is that the character has an inner motor , a dominant , unconscious goal that they 're striving for , an itch that they ca n't scratch .
she gave a wonderful example of michael corleone , al pacino 's character in " the godfather , " and that probably his spine was to please his father .
and it 's something that always drove all his choices .
even after his father died , he was still trying to scratch that itch .
i took to this like a duck to water .
wall - e 's was to find the beauty .
marlin 's , the father in " finding nemo , " was to prevent harm .
and woody 's was to do what was best for his child .
and these spines do n't always drive you to make the best choices .
sometimes you can make some horrible choices with them .
i 'm really blessed to be a parent , and watching my children grow , i really firmly believe that you 're born with a temperament and you 're wired a certain way , and you do n't have any say about it , and there 's no changing it .
all you can do is learn to recognize it and own it .
and some of us are born with temperaments that are positive , some are negative .
but a major threshold is passed when you mature enough to acknowledge what drives you and to take the wheel and steer it .
as parents , you 're always learning who your children are .
they 're learning who they are .
and you 're still learning who you are .
so we 're all learning all the time .
and that 's why change is fundamental in story .
if things go static , stories die , because life is never static .
in 1998 , i had finished writing " toy story " and " a bug 's life " and i was completely hooked on screenwriting .
so i wanted to become much better at it and learn anything i could .
so i researched everything i possibly could .
and i finally came across this fantastic quote by a british playwright , william archer : " drama is anticipation mingled with uncertainty . "
it 's an incredibly insightful definition .
when you 're telling a story , have you constructed anticipation ?
in the short - term , have you made me want to know what will happen next ?
but more importantly , have you made me want to know how it will all conclude in the long - term ?
have you constructed honest conflicts with truth that creates doubt in what the outcome might be ?
an example would be in " finding nemo , " in the short tension , you were always worried , would dory 's short - term memory make her forget whatever she was being told by marlin .
but under that was this global tension of will we ever find nemo in this huge , vast ocean ?
in our earliest days at pixar , before we truly understood the invisible workings of story , we were simply a group of guys just going on our gut , going on our instincts .
and it 's interesting to see how that led us places that were actually pretty good .
you 've got to remember that in this time of year , 1993 , what was considered a successful animated picture was " the little mermaid , " " beauty and the beast , " " aladdin , " " lion king . "
so when we pitched " toy story " to tom hanks for the first time , he walked in and he said , " you do n't want me to sing , do you ? "
and i thought that epitomized perfectly what everybody thought animation had to be at the time .
but we really wanted to prove that you could tell stories completely different in animation .
we did n't have any influence then , so we had a little secret list of rules that we kept to ourselves .
and they were : no songs , no " i want " moment , no happy village , no love story .
and the irony is that , in the first year , our story was not working at all and disney was panicking .
so they privately got advice from a famous lyricist , who i wo n't name , and he faxed them some suggestions .
and we got a hold of that fax .
and the fax said , there should be songs , there should be an " i want " song , there should be a happy village song , there should be a love story and there should be a villain .
and thank goodness we were just too young , rebellious and contrarian at the time .
that just gave us more determination to prove that you could build a better story .
and a year after that , we did conquer it .
and it just went to prove that storytelling has guidelines , not hard , fast rules .
another fundamental thing we learned was about liking your main character .
and we had naively thought , well woody in " toy story " has to become selfless at the end , so you 've got to start from someplace .
so let 's make him selfish . and this is what you get .
woody : what do you think you 're doing ?
off the bed .
hey , off the bed !
mr. potato head : you going to make us , woody ?
woody : no , he is .
slinky ? slink ... slinky !
get up here and do your job .
are you deaf ?
i said , take care of them .
slinky : i 'm sorry , woody , but i have to agree with them .
i do n't think what you did was right .
woody : what ? am i hearing correctly ?
you do n't think i was right ?
who said your job was to think , spring wiener ?
as : so how do you make a selfish character likable ?
we realized , you can make him kind , generous , funny , considerate , as long as one condition is met for him , is that he stays the top toy .
and that 's what it really is , is that we all live life conditionally .
we 're all willing to play by the rules and follow things along , as long as certain conditions are met .
after that , all bets are off .
and before i 'd even decided to make storytelling my career , i can now see key things that happened in my youth that really sort of opened my eyes to certain things about story .
in 1986 , i truly understood the notion of story having a theme .
and that was the year that they restored and re - released " lawrence of arabia . "
and i saw that thing seven times in one month .
i could n't get enough of it .
i could just tell there was a grand design under it -- in every shot , every scene , every line .
yet , on the surface it just seemed to be depicting his historical lineage of what went on .
yet , there was something more being said . what exactly was it ?
and it was n't until , on one of my later viewings , that the veil was lifted and it was in a scene where he 's walked across the sinai desert and he 's reached the suez canal , and i suddenly got it .
boy : hey ! hey ! hey ! hey !
cyclist : who are you ?
who are you ?
as : that was the theme : who are you ?
here were all these seemingly disparate events and dialogues that just were chronologically telling the history of him , but underneath it was a constant , a guideline , a road map .
everything lawrence did in that movie was an attempt for him to figure out where his place was in the world .
a strong theme is always running through a well - told story .
when i was five , i was introduced to possibly the most major ingredient that i feel a story should have , but is rarely invoked .
and this is what my mother took me to when i was five .
thumper : come on . it 's all right .
look .
the water 's stiff .
bambi : yippee !
thumper : some fun , huh , bambi ?
come on . get up .
like this .
ha ha . no , no , no.
as : i walked out of there wide - eyed with wonder .
and that 's what i think the magic ingredient is , the secret sauce , is can you invoke wonder .
wonder is honest , it 's completely innocent .
it ca n't be artificially evoked .
for me , there 's no greater ability than the gift of another human being giving you that feeling -- to hold them still just for a brief moment in their day and have them surrender to wonder .
when it 's tapped , the affirmation of being alive , it reaches you almost to a cellular level .
and when an artist does that to another artist , it 's like you 're compelled to pass it on .
it 's like a dormant command that suddenly is activated in you , like a call to devil 's tower .
do unto others what 's been done to you .
the best stories infuse wonder .
when i was four years old , i have a vivid memory of finding two pinpoint scars on my ankle and asking my dad what they were .
and he said i had a matching pair like that on my head , but i could n't see them because of my hair .
and he explained that when i was born , i was born premature , that i came out much too early , and i was n't fully baked ; i was very , very sick .
and when the doctor took a look at this yellow kid with black teeth , he looked straight at my mom and said , " he 's not going to live . "
and i was in the hospital for months .
and many blood transfusions later , i lived , and that made me special .
i do n't know if i really believe that .
i do n't know if my parents really believe that , but i did n't want to prove them wrong .
whatever i ended up being good at , i would strive to be worthy of the second chance i was given .
marlin : there , there , there .
it 's okay , daddy 's here .
daddy 's got you .
i promise , i will never let anything happen to you , nemo .
as : and that 's the first story lesson i ever learned .
use what you know . draw from it .
it does n't always mean plot or fact .
it means capturing a truth from your experiencing it , expressing values you personally feel deep down in your core .
and that 's what ultimately led me to speaking to you here at tedtalk today .
thank you .
