i 'm a , or was , or kind of am a toy designer .
and before i was a toy designer , oh , i was a mime , a street mime , actually .
and then i was an entertainer , i guess .
and before that , i was a silversmith , and before that , i was -- i was out of the house at about 15 and a half , and i never wound up going into college .
i did n't really -- i did n't see the point at the time .
i do now , after learning about all the quantum stuff .
it 's really cool .
anyway , i wanted to show you a little bit about the world of toy design , at least from my small aperture of the world .
this is a video i made when i first started doing toy design .
i 'm in my garage , making weird stuff .
and then you go to these toy companies and there 's some guy across the table , and he goes , " pass . pass . pass . "
you know , you think it 's so cool , but they -- anyway , i made this little tape that i 'd always show when i go in .
this is the name of my company , giving toys .
so i used to work at mattel , actually .
and after i left mattel , i started all these hamburger makers , and then got the license to make the maker .
so this is a hamburger maker that you take the peanut butter and stuff and you put it in there , and it makes -- and this is a french fry maker , little , tiny food you can eat .
i beat up the pasta maker to make that .
then this is a mcnugget maker , i think .
this , now that 's the mcnugget maker , and this is a -- this is my oldest daughter making a mcapple pie .
and let 's see , you can make the pie and cinnamon and sugar , and then you eat , and you eat , and you eat , and you -- she 's about 300 pounds now .
no , she 's not , she 's beautiful .
this is how they looked when they came out at the end .
these are a -- this is like a 15 million dollar line .
and it got me through some -- i did n't make any royalties on this , but it got me through .
next is a compilation of a bunch of stuff .
that was a missile foam launcher that did n't get sold .
this is a squishy head , for no apparent reason .
this is some effects that i did for " wig , rattle and roll . "
that was a robot eye thing controlling it in the back .
that paid the rent for about a month .
this is a walking barbie -- i said , " oh , this is it ! "
and they go , " oh , that 's really nice , " and out it goes .
so this is some fighting robots . i thought everyone would want these .
they fight , they get back up , you know ? would n't this be cool ?
and they made it into a toy , and then they dropped it like a hot rock .
they 're pretty cool .
this is a -- we 're doing some flight - testing on my little pug , seeing if this can really grab .
it does pretty good .
i 'm using little phone connectors to make them so they can spin .
it 's how they , see , have those album things -- kids do n't know what they are .
this is a clay maker .
you know , i said -- i went to play - doh , and said , " look , i can animate this . "
they said , " do n't talk to us about play - doh . "
and then , i made a lego animator .
i thought , this would be so great !
and you know , lego -- do n't take legos to lego .
that 's the answer . they know everything about it .
then i started doing animatronics .
i loved dinosaurs .
i used to be in the film business , kind of , and actually , nicholas negroponte saw this when i was , like , 12 , and anyway , so then they said , " no , you have to make two and they have to fight . "
you know , how -- why would a kid want a dinosaur ?
this is me using [ unclear ] or 3 - d studio , back in the '80s .
that 's david letterman .
you can see how old this stuff is .
that 's my youngest cousin .
this is a segment called , " dangerous toys you wo n't see at christmas . "
we had my first saw blade launcher and we had a flamethrower chair .
my career basically peaked here .
and in the back are foam - core cutouts of the people who could n't make it to the show .
this is mek going through a windshield wiper motor .
so this is a -- i used to kind of be an actor .
and i 'm really not very good at it .
but the -- this is a guy named dr. yatz , who would take toys apart and show kids about engineering .
and you can see the massively parallel processing nintendos there .
and over to the left is a view master of the cd - rom .
and a guy named stan reznikov did this as a pilot .
this is a -- you can see the little window there .
you can actually see the steadicam with a bubble on the bottom .
you see the keyboard strapped to my wrist .
way ahead of my time here .
narrator : i love toys !
caleb chung : that 's all i wanted to say there . i love toys .
ok , so , so that was a , that was the first kind of a -- that was the first batch of products .
most of them did not go .
you get one out of 20 , one out of 30 products .
and every now and then , we do something like a , you know , an automated hair wrap machine , you know , that tangles your hair and pulls your scalp out , and -- and we 'd make some money on that , you know . and we 'd give it out .
but eventually , we left l.a. , and we moved to idaho , where there was actually a lot of peace and quiet .
and i started working on this project -- oh , i have to tell you about this real quick .
throughout this whole thing , making toys , i think there is a real correlation with innovation and art and science .
there 's some kind of a blend that happens that allows , you know , to find innovation .
and i tried to sum this up in some kind of symbol that means something , to me anyway .
and so , art and science have a kind of dynamic balance , that 's where i think innovation happens .
and actually , this is , to me , how i can come up with great ideas .
but it 's not how you actually get leverage .
actually , you have to put a circle around that , and call it business .
and those three together , i think , give you leverage in the world .
but moving on .
so , this is a quick tale i 'm going to tell . this is the furby tale .
as he said , i was co - inventor of the furby .
i did the body and creature -- well , you 'll see .
so by way of showing you this , you can kind of get an understanding of what it is to , hopefully , try to create robotic life forms , or technology that has an emotional connection with the user .
so this is my family .
this is my wife , christi , and abby , and melissa , and my 17 - year - old now , emily , who was just a pack of trouble .
all right , there 's that robot again .
i came out of the movie business , as i said , and i said , let 's make these animatronic robots .
let 's make these things .
and so i 've always had a big interest in this .
this one actually did n't go anywhere , but i got my feet wet doing this .
this is a smaller one , and i have a little moving torso on there .
a little , tiny guy walks along . more servo drives , lots of servo hacking , lots of mechanical stuff .
there 's another one .
he actually has skeletor legs , i think , he 's wearing there .
oh , this is a little pony , little pony -- very cute little thing .
the point of showing these is i 've always been interested in little artificial life pieces .
so the challenge was -- i worked for microsoft for a little bit , working on the microsoft barney .
and this is a -- you know , the purple dinosaur with kind of bloat wear .
and , you know , they had lots , just lots of stuff in there that you did n't need , i thought .
and then microsoft can just fill a , you know , a warehouse full of this stuff and see if they sell .
so it 's a really strange business model compared to coming from a toy company .
but anyway , a friend of mine and i , dave hampton , decided to see if we could do like a single - cell organism .
what 's the fewest pieces we could use to make a little life form ?
and that 's our little , thirty - cent mabuchi motor .
and so , i have all these design books , like i 'm sure many of you have .
and throughout the books -- this is the first page on furby -- i have kind of the art and science .
i have the why over here , and the how over there .
i try to do a lot of philosophy , a lot of thinking about all of these projects .
because they 're not just " bing " ideas ; you have to really dig deep in these things .
so there 's some real pseudo - code over here , and getting the idea of different kind of drives , things like that .
and originally , furby only had two eyes and some batteries on the bottom .
and then we said , well , you 're going to feed him , and he needs to talk , and it got more complicated .
and then i had to figure out how i 'm going to use that one motor to make the eyes move , and the ears move , and the body to move , and the mouth to move .
and , you know , i want to make it blink and do all that at the same time .
well , i came up with this kind of linear expression thing with these cams and feedback . and that worked pretty well .
then i started to get a little more realistic and i have to start drawing the stuff .
and there 's my " note to self " at the top : " lots of engineering . "
so that turned out to be a little more than true .
there 's my first exploded view and all the little pieces and the little worm drive and all that stuff .
and then i 've got to start building it , so this is the real thing .
i get up and start cutting my finger and gluing things together .
and that 's my little workshop .
and there 's the first little cam that drove furby .
and there 's furby on the half shell .
you can see the little bb in the box is my tilt sensor .
i just basically gnawed all this stuff out of plastic .
so there 's the back of his head with a billion holes in it .
and there i am. i 'm done . there 's my little furby .
no , it 's a little robot on heroin or something , i think .
so right now , you see , i love little robots .
so my wife says , " well , you may like it , but nobody else will . "
so she comes to the rescue .
this is my wife christi , who is just , you know , my muse and my partner for eternity here .
and she does drawings , right ?
she 's an actual , you know , artist .
and she starts doing all these different drawings and does color patterns and coloring books .
and i like the guy with the cigar at the bottom there .
he did n't test so well , but i like him .
and then she started doing these other images .
at that time , beanie babies was a big hit , and we thought , we 'll do a bunch of different ones .
so here 's a little pink one , a little pouf on his head .
and here 's -- this did n't do so well in testing either , i do n't know why .
there 's my favorite , demon furby .
that was a good one .
anyway , finally settled on kind of this kind of a look , little poufy body , a little imaginary character .
and there he is , a little bush baby on -- caught in the headlights there .
i actually went to toys " r " us , got a little furry cat , ripped it apart and made this .
and since then , every time i come home from toys " r " us with dolls or something , they disappear from my desk and they get hidden in the house .
i have three girls and they just , they -- it 's like a rescue animal thing they 're going there .
so , a little tether coming off , it 's just a control for the fur 's mouth and his eyes .
it 's just a little server control and i made a little video going : " hi , my name 's furby , and i 'm good , " you know , and then i 'd reach my hand .
he 'd -- you can tickle him . when i put my hand up , " ha , ha , ha , ha " and that 's how we sold him .
and hasbro actually said , i meant tiger electronics at the time , said , " yeah , we want to do this .
we have , you know , 13 weeks or something to toy fair , and we 're going to hire you guys to do this . "
and so dave and i got working .
mostly me , because it was all mechanics at this point .
so now i have to really figure out all kinds of stuff i do n't know how to do .
and i started working with solid works and a whole other group to do that .
and we started -- this was way back before there was really much sla going on , not a lot of rapid prototyping .
we certainly did n't have the money to do this .
they only paid me , like , a little bit of money to do this , so i had to call a friend of a friend who was running the gm prototype plant , sla plant , that was down .
and they said , " yeah , well , we 'll run them . "
so they ran all the shells for us , which was nice of them .
and the cams i got cut at hewlett packard .
we snuck in on the weekend .
and so we just had a disc of the files .
but they have a closed system , so you could n't print the things out on the machine .
so we actually printed them out on clear and taped them on the monitors .
and on the weekend we ran the parts for that .
so this is how they come out close to the end .
and then they looked like little garfields there .
eight months later -- you may remember this , this was a -- total , total , total chaos .
for a while , they were making two million furbys a month .
they actually wound up doing about 40 million furbys .
i -- it 's unbelievable how -- i do n't know how that can be .
and hasbro made about , you know , a billion and a half dollars .
and i just a little bit on each one .
so full circle -- why do i do this ?
why do you , you know , try to do this stuff ?
and it 's , of course , for your kids .
and there 's my youngest daughter with her furbys .
and she still actually has those .
so i kind of retired , and we 're already living in paradise up in boise , on a river , you know . so and then i started another company called toy innovation and we did some projects with mattel with actually with a lady who 's here , ivy ross , and we did miracle moves baby , made it in wired magazine , did a bunch of other stuff .
and then i started another company .
we did a little hand - held device for teens that could hook up to the internet , won " best innovations " at ces , but really i kind of slowed down and said , ok , i just ... after a while , i had this old tape of this dinosaur , and i gave it to this guy , and this other guy saw it , and then people started to want to do it .
and they said they 'd spend all this time .
so i said , " ok , let 's try to do this dinosaur project . "
the crazy idea is we 're going to try to clone a dinosaur as much as we can with today 's technology .
and it 's not really -- but as close as we can do .
and we 're going to try to really pull this off , intentfully try to make something that seems like it 's alive .
not a robot that kind of does , but let 's really go for it .
so i picked a camarasaurus , because the camarasaurus was the most abundant of the sauropods in north america .
and you could actually find full fossil evidence of these .
that 's a juvenile .
and so we actually went in .
there 's a book called " walking on eggshells , " where they found actual sauropod skin in patagonia .
and the picture from the book , so when i -- i told the sculptor to use this bump pattern , whatever you can to copy that .
very , very obsessive .
there 's a kind of truncated camarasaurus skeleton , but the geometry 's correct .
and then i went in , and measured all the geometry because i figured , hey , biomimicry .
if i do it kind of right , it might move kind of like the real thing .
so there 's the motor .
and about this time , you know , all these other people are starting to help .
here 's an example of what we did with the skull .
there 's the skull , there 's my drawing of a skull .
there 's kind of the skin version of the soft tissue .
there 's the mechanism that would go in there , kind of a geneva drive .
there 's some solid works versions of it .
here 's some sla parts of the same thing .
and then , these are really crude pieces . we were just doing some tests here .
there 's the skull , pretty much the same shape as the camarasaurus .
there 's a photorealistic eye behind a lens .
and there 's kind of the first exploded view , or see - through view .
there 's the first sla version , and it already kind of has the feel , it has kind of a cuteness already .
and the thing about blending science and art in this multidisciplinary stuff is you can do a robot , and then you go back and do the shape , and then you go back and forth .
the servos in the front legs , we had to shape those like muscles .
they had to fit within the envelope .
there was a tremendous amount of work to get all that working right .
all the neck and the tail are cable , so it moves smoothly and organically .
and then , of course , you 're not done yet .
you have to get the look for the skin .
the skin 's a whole another thing , probably the hardest part .
so you hire artists , and you try to get the look and feel of the character .
now , this is not -- we 're character designers , right ?
and we 're still trying to keep with the real character .
so , now you go back and you cover the whole thing with clay .
now you start doing the sculpture for this .
and you can see we got a guy from -- who 's just a fanatic about dinosaurs to do the sculpting for us , down to the spoon - shaped teeth and everything .
and then more sculpting , and then more sculpting , and then more sculpting , and then more sculpting .
and then , four years and 10 million dollars later , we have a little pleo .
john , do you want to bring him up ?
john sosoka is our cto , and is really the man that 's done most of the work with our 40 - person company .
i 'd like to give john a hand . he never gets recognition . this is john sosoka .
so , thank you , john , thank you , and get back to work , all right , man ?
all right -- -- no , it 's very painful , so -- -- these are little pleos and you can probably see them .
this -- i on purpose -- they go through life stages .
so when you first get them , they 're babies .
and you -- more you have them , kind of the older they get , and they kind of learn through their behavior .
so this one , this one 's actually asleep , and -- hang on .
pleo , wake up . pleo , come on .
so this guy 's listening to my voice here .
but they have 40 sensors all over their body .
they have seven processors , they have 14 motors , they have -- but you do n't care , do you ?
they 're just cute , right ? that 's the idea , that 's the idea .
so you see -- hey , come on . hey , did you feel that ?
there 's something big and loud over here .
hey .
that 's good , wake up , wake up , wake up .
yeah , they 're like kids , you know .
you , yeah , yeah . okay , he 's hungry .
i 'll show you what he 's been doing for , for four years .
here , here , here . have some money , pleo .
there you go .
that 's what the investors think , that it 's just -- -- right , right . so they 're really sweet little guys .
and we 're hoping that -- you know , our belief is that humans need to feel empathy towards things in order to be more human .
and we think we can help that out by having little creatures that you can love .
now these are not robots , they 're kind of lovebots , you know .
they do change over time .
but mostly they evoke a feeling of caring .
and we have a -- i have a little something here .
now i do want to say that , you know , ugobe is not there yet .
we 've just opened the door , and it 's for all of you to step through it .
we did include some things that are hopefully useful .
excuse me , pleo .
they -- he has a usb and he has a sd card , so it 's completely open architecture .
so anyone can plug him -- -- thank you .
this is john over here .
anyone can take pleo and they can totally redo his personality .
you can make him bipolar , or as someone said , a -- -- you can change his homeostatic drives , or whatever you want to call them .
kids can just drag and drop , put in new sounds .
we -- actually , it 's very hard to keep people from doing this .
we have one animator who 's taken it and he 's done a take on the budweiser beer commercial , and they 're going , " whassup , " you know ?
you -- so it 's -- yes , he likes that .
so they 're a handful . we hope you get one .
i do n't know what i 'm missing to say , but as a last thing , i 'd like to say is that if we continue along this path , we are designing our children 's best friends .
and there 's a lot of social responsibility in that .
that 's why pleo 's soft and gentle and loving .
and so i just -- i hope we all dream well .
thank you .
