i am a ph.d. student and that means i have a question : how can we make digital content graspable ?
because you see , on the one hand , there is the digital world and no question , many things are happening there right now .
and for us humans , it 's not quite material , it 's not really there -- it 's virtual .
on the other hand , we humans , we live in a physical world .
it 's rich , it tastes good , it feels good , it smells good .
so the question is : how do we get the stuff over from the digital into the physical ?
that 's my question .
if you look at the iphone with its touch and the wii with its bodily activity , you can see the tendency ; it 's getting physical .
the question is : what 's next ?
now , i have three options that i would like to show you .
the first one is mass.
as humans , we are sensitive to where an object in our hand is heavy .
so , could we use that in mobile phones ?
let me show you the weight - shifting mobile .
it is a mobile phone - shaped box that has an iron weight inside , which we can move around , and you can feel where it 's heavy .
we shift the gravitational center of it .
for example , we can augment digital content with physical mass.
so you move around the content on a display , but you can also feel where it is just from the weight of the device .
another thing it 's good for is navigation -- it can guide you around in a city .
it can tell you by its weight , " okay , move right . walk ahead . make a left here . "
and the good thing about that is you do n't have to look at the device all the time ; you have your eyes free to see the city .
now , mass is the first thing ; the second thing , that 's shape .
we 're also sensitive to the shape of objects we have in [ our ] hands .
so if i download an e-book and it has 20 pages -- well , they could be thin , right -- but if it has 500 pages , i want to feel that " harry potter " -- it 's thick .
so let me show you the shape - changing mobile .
again , it 's a mobile phone - shaped box , and this one can change its shape .
we can play with the shape itself .
for example , it can be thin in your pocket , which we of course want it to be ; but then if you hold it in your hand , it can lean towards you , be thick .
it 's like tapered to the downside .
if you change the grasp , it can adjust to that .
it 's also useful if you want to put it down on your nightstand to watch a movie or use as an alarm clock , it stands .
it 's fairly simple .
another thing is , sometimes we watch things on a mobile phone , they are bigger than the phone itself .
so in that case -- like here , there 's an app that 's bigger than the phone 's screen -- the shape of the phone could tell you , " okay , off the screen right here , there is more content .
you ca n't see it , but it 's there . "
and you can feel that because it 's thicker at that edge .
the shape is the second thing .
the third thing operates on a different level .
as humans , we are social , we are empathic , and that 's great .
would n't that be a way to make mobile phones more intuitive ?
think of a hamster in the pocket .
well , i can feel it , it 's doing all right -- i do n't have to check it .
let me show you the living mobile phone .
so , once again , mobile phone - shaped box , but this one , it has a breath and a heartbeat , and it feels very organic .
and you can tell , it 's relaxed right now .
oh now , missed call , a new call , new girlfriend maybe -- very exciting .
how do we calm it down ?
you give it a pat behind the ears , and everything is all right again .
so , that 's very intuitive , and that 's what we want .
so , what we have seen are three ways to make the digital graspable for us .
and i think making it physical is a good way to do that .
what 's behind that is a postulation , namely that not humans should get much more technical in the future ; rather than that , technology , a bit more human .
