my thing with school lunch is , it 's a social justice issue .
i 'm the director of nutrition services for the berkeley unified school district . i have 90 employees and 17 locations , 9,600 kids .
i 'm doing 7,100 meals a day and i 've been doing it for two years , trying to change how we feed kids in america .
and that 's what i want to talk to you a little bit about today .
these are some of my kids with a salad bar .
i put salad bars in all of our schools when i got there .
everyone says it could n't be done .
little kids could n't eat off the salad bar , big kids would spit in it -- neither happened .
when i took over this , i tried to really figure out , like , what my vision would be .
how do we really change children 's relationship to food ?
and i 'll tell you why we need to change it , but we absolutely have to change it .
and what i came to understand is , we needed to teach children the symbiotic relationship between a healthy planet , healthy food and healthy kids .
and that if we do n't do that , the antithesis , although we 've heard otherwise , is we 're really going to become extinct , because we 're feeding our children to death .
that 's my premise .
we 're seeing sick kids get sicker and sicker .
and the reason this is happening , by and large , is because of our food system and the way the government commodifies food , the way the government oversees our food , the way the usda puts food on kids ' plates that 's unhealthy , and allows unhealthy food into schools .
and by -- tacitly , all of us send our kids , or grandchildren , or nieces , or nephews , to school and tell them to learn , you know , learn what 's in those schools .
and when you feed these kids bad food , that 's what they 're learning . so that 's really what this is all about .
the way we got here is because of big agribusiness .
we now live in a country where most of us do n't decide , by and large , what we eat . we see big businesses , monsanto and dupont , who brought out agent orange and stain - resistant carpet .
they control 90 percent of the commercially produced seeds in our country .
these are -- 10 companies control much of what 's in our grocery stores , much of what people eat . and that 's really , really a problem .
so when i started thinking about these issues and how i was going to change what kids ate , i really started focusing on what we would teach them .
and the very first thing was about regional food -- trying to eat food from within our region .
and clearly , with what 's going on with fossil fuel usage , or when -- as the fossil fuel is going away , as oil hits its peak oil , you know , we really have to start thinking about whether or not we should , or could , be moving food 1,500 miles before we eat it .
so we talked to kids about that , and we really start to feed kids regional food .
and then we talk about organic food .
now , most school districts ca n't really afford organic food , but we , as a nation , have to start thinking about consuming , growing and feeding our children food that 's not chock - full of chemicals .
we ca n't keep feeding our kids pesticides and herbicides and antibiotics and hormones .
we ca n't keep doing that .
you know , it does n't work .
and the results of that are kids getting sick .
one of my big soapboxes right now is antibiotics .
seventy percent of all antibiotics consumed in america is consumed in animal husbandry .
we are feeding our kids antibiotics in beef and other animal protein every day .
seventy percent -- it 's unbelievable .
and the result of it is , we have diseases .
we have things like e. coli that we ca n't fix , that we ca n't make kids better when they get sick .
and , you know , certainly antibiotics have been over - prescribed , but it 's an issue in the food supply .
one of my favorite facts is that u.s. agriculture uses 1.2 billion pounds of pesticides every year .
that means every one of us , and our children , consumes what would equal a five - pound bag -- those bags you have at home . if i had one here and ripped it open , and that pile i would have on the floor is what we consume and feed our children every year because of what goes into our food supply , because of the way we consume produce in america .
the usda allows these antibiotics , these hormones and these pesticides in our food supply , and the usda paid for this ad in time magazine .
okay , we could talk about rachel carson and ddt , but we know it was n't good for you and me .
and that is what the usda allows in our food supply .
and that has to change , you know .
the usda cannot be seen as the be - all and end - all of what we feed our kids and what 's allowed .
we cannot believe that they have our best interests at heart .
the antithesis of this whole thing is sustainable food .
that 's what i really try and get people to understand .
i really try and teach it to kids . i think it 's the most important .
it 's consuming food in a way in which we 'll still have a planet , in which kids will grow up to be healthy , and which really tries to mitigate all the negative impacts we 're seeing .
it really is just a new idea .
i mean , people toss around sustainability , but we have to figure out what sustainability is .
in less than 200 years , you know , just in a few generations , we 've gone from being 200 -- being 100 percent , 95 percent farmers to less than 2 percent of farmers .
we now live in a country that has more prisoners than farmers -- 2.1 million prisoners , 1.9 million farmers .
and we spend 35,000 dollars on average a year keeping a prisoner in prison , and school districts spend 500 dollars a year feeding a child .
it 's no wonder , you know , we have criminals .
and what 's happening is , we 're getting sick .
we 're getting sick and our kids are getting sick .
it is about what we feed them .
what goes in is what we are .
we really are what we eat .
and if we continue down this path , if we continue to feed kids bad food , if we continue not to teach them what good food is , what 's going to happen ? you know , what is going to happen ?
what 's going to happen to our whole medical system ?
what 's going to happen is , we 're going to have kids that have a life less long than our own .
the cdc , the center for disease control , has said , of the children born in the year 2000 -- those seven - and eight - year - olds today -- one out of every three caucasians , one out of every two african - americans and hispanics are going to have diabetes in their lifetime .
and if that 's not enough , they 've gone on to say , most before they graduate high school .
this means that 40 or 45 percent of all school - aged children could be insulin - dependent within a decade . within a decade .
what 's going to happen ?
well , the cdc has gone further to say that those children born in the year 2000 could be the first generation in our country 's history to die at a younger age than their parents .
and it 's because of what we feed them .
because eight - year - olds do n't get to decide -- and if they do , you should be in therapy .
you know , we are responsible for what kids eat .
but oops , maybe they 're responsible for what kids eat .
big companies spend 20 billion dollars a year marketing non - nutrient foods to kids .
20 billion dollars a year . 10,000 ads most kids see .
they spend 500 dollars for every one dollar -- 500 dollars marketing foods that kids should n't eat for every one dollar marketing healthy , nutritious food .
the result of which is kids think they 're going to die if they do n't have chicken nuggets .
you know that everybody thinks they should be eating more , and more , and more .
this is the usda portion size , that little , tiny thing .
and the one over there , that 's bigger than my head , is what mcdonald 's and burger king and those big companies think we should eat .
and why can they serve that much ?
why can we have 29 - cent big gulps and 99 - cent double burgers ?
it 's because of the way the government commodifies food , and the cheap corn and cheap soy that are pushed into our food supply that makes these non - nutrient foods really , really cheap .
which is why i say it 's a social justice issue .
now , i said i 'm doing this in berkeley , and you might think , " oh , berkeley . of course you can do it in berkeley . "
well , this is the food i found 24 months ago .
this is not even food .
this is the stuff we were feeding our kids : extremo burritos , corn dogs , pizza pockets , grilled cheese sandwiches .
everything came in plastic , in cardboard .
the only kitchen tools my staff had was a box cutter .
the only working piece of equipment in my kitchen was a can crusher , because if it did n't come in a can , it came frozen in a box .
the usda allows this .
the usda allows all of this stuff .
in case you ca n't tell , that 's , like , pink danish and some kind of cupcakes .
chicken nuggets , tater tots , chocolate milk with high fructose , canned fruit cocktail -- a reimbursable meal .
that 's what the government says is okay to feed our kids .
it ai n't okay . you know what ? it is not okay .
and we , all of us , have to understand that this is about us , that we can make a difference here .
now i do n't know if any of you out there invented chicken nuggets , but i 'm sure you 're rich if you did .
but whoever decided that a chicken should look like a heart , a giraffe , a star ?
well , tyson did , because there 's no chicken in the chicken .
and that they could figure it out , that we could sell this stuff to kids .
you know , what 's wrong with teaching kids that chicken looks like chicken ?
but this is what most schools serve .
in fact , this may be what a lot of parents serve , as opposed to -- this is what we try and serve .
we really need to change this whole paradigm with kids and food .
we really have to teach children that chicken is not a giraffe .
you know , that vegetables are actually colorful , that they have flavor , that carrots grow in the ground , that strawberries grow in the ground .
there 's not a strawberry tree or a carrot bush .
you know , we have to change the way we teach kids about these things .
there 's a lot of stuff we can do . there 's a lot of schools doing farm - to - school programs . there 's a lot of schools actually getting fresh food into schools .
now , in berkeley , we 've gone totally fresh .
we have no high - fructose corn syrup , no trans fats , no processed foods .
we 're cooking from scratch every day .
we have 25 percent of our -- thank you -- 25 percent of our stuff is organic and local . we cook .
those are my hands . i get up at 4 a.m.
every day and go cook the food for the kids , because this is what we need to do .
we ca n't keep serving kids processed crap , full of chemicals , and expect these are going to be healthy citizens .
you 're not going to get the next generation , or the generation after , to be able to think like this if they 're not nourished .
if they 're eating chemicals all the time , they 're not going to be able to think .
they 're not going to be smart .
you know what ? they 're just going to be sick .
now one of the things that -- what happened when i went into berkeley is i realized that , you know , this was all pretty amazing to people , very , very different , and i needed to market it .
i came up with these calendars that i sent home to every parent .
and these calendars really started to lay out my program .
now i 'm in charge of all the cooking classes and all the gardening classes in our school district .
so this is a typical menu .
this is what we 're serving this week at the schools .
and you see these recipes on the side ?
those are the recipes that the kids learn in my cooking classes .
they do tastings of these ingredients in the gardening classes .
they also may be growing them . and we serve them in the cafeterias .
if we 're going to change children 's relationship to food , it 's delicious , nutritious food in the cafeterias , hands - on experience -- you 're looking in cooking and gardening classes -- and academic curriculum to tie it all together .
now you 've probably garnered that i do n't love the usda , and i do n't have any idea what to do with their pyramid , this upside - down pyramid with a rainbow over the top , i do n't know .
you know , run up into the end of the rainbow , i do n't know what you do with it . so , i came up with my own .
this is available on my website in english and spanish , and it 's a visual way to talk to kids about food .
the really tiny hamburger , the really big vegetables .
we have to start changing this .
we have to make kids understand that their food choices make a big difference .
we have cooking classes -- we have cooking classrooms in our schools .
and why this is so important is that we now have grown a generation , maybe two , of kids where one out of every four meals is eaten in fast food , one of every four meals is eaten in a car and one out of every last four meals is eaten in front of a tv or computer .
what are kids learning ? where is the family time ?
where is socialization ? where is discussion ?
where is learning to talk ?
you know , we have to change it .
i work with kids a lot . these are kids i work with in harlem .
eatwise -- enlightened and aware teens who inspire smart eating .
we have to teach kids that coke and pop tarts are n't breakfast .
we have to teach kids that if they 're on a diet of refined sugar , they go up and down , just like if they 're on a diet of crack .
and we have to pull it all together . we have composting in all of our schools .
we have recycling in all of our schools .
you know , the things that we maybe do at home and think are so important , we have to teach kids about in school .
it has to be so much a part of them that they really get it .
because , you know what , many of us are sort of at the end of our careers , and we need to be giving these kids -- these young kids , the next generation -- the tools to save themselves and save the planet .
one of the things i do a lot is public - private partnerships .
i work with private companies who are willing to do r & d with me , who are willing to do distribution for me , who are really willing to work to go into schools .
schools are underfunded .
most schools in america spend less than 7,500 dollars a year teaching a child .
that comes down to under five dollars an hour .
most of you spend 10 , 15 dollars an hour for babysitters when you have them .
so we 're spending less than 5 dollars an hour on the educational system .
and if we 're going to change it , and change how we feed kids , we really have to rethink that .
so , public and private partnerships , advocacy groups , working with foundations .
in our school district , the way we afford this is our school district allocates .03 percent of the general fund towards nutrition services . and i think if every school district allocated a half to one percent , we could start to really fix this program .
we really need to change it .
it 's going to take more money .
of course , it 's not all about food ; it 's also about kids getting exercise .
and one of the simple things we can do is put recess before lunch .
it 's sort of this " duh " thing .
you know , if you have kids coming into lunch and all they 're going to do when they get out of lunch is go to have recess , you see them just throw away their lunch so they can run outside .
and then , at one in the afternoon , they 're totally crashing .
these are your children and grandchildren that are totally melting down when you pick them up , because they have n't had lunch .
so if the only thing they 'd have to do after lunch is go to class , believe me , they 're going to sit there and eat their lunch .
we need to -- we need to educate .
we need to educate the kids .
we need to educate the staff .
i had 90 employees .
two were supposed to be cooks -- none could .
and , you know , i 'm not that better off now .
but we really have to educate .
we have to get academic institutions to start thinking about ways to teach people how to cook again , because , of course , they do n't -- because we 've had this processed food in schools and institutions for so long .
we need 40 - minute lunches -- most schools have 20 - minute lunches -- and lunches that are time - appropriate .
there was just a big study done , and so many schools are starting lunch at nine and 10 in the morning .
that is not lunchtime .
you know , it 's crazy . it 's crazy what we 're doing .
and just remember , at very least tacitly , this is what we 're teaching children as what they should be doing .
i think if we 're going to fix this , one of the things we have to do is really change how we have oversight over the national school lunch program .
instead of the national school lunch program being under the usda , i think it should be under cdc .
if we started to think about food and how we feed our kids as a health initiative , and we started thinking about food as health , then i think we would n't have corn dogs as lunch .
okay , finance 101 on this , and this -- i 'm sort of wrapping it up with this finance piece , because i think this is something we all have to understand .
the national school lunch program spends 8 billion dollars feeding 30 million children a year .
that number probably needs to double .
people say , " oh my god , where are we going to get 8 billion ? "
in this country , we 're spending 110 billion dollars a year on fast food .
we spend 100 billion dollars a year on diet aids .
we spend 50 billion dollars on vegetables , which is why we need all the diet aids .
we spend 200 billion dollars a year on diet - related illness today , with nine percent of our kids having type 2 diabetes .
200 billion .
so you know what , when we talk about needing 8 billion more , it 's not a lot .
that 8 billion comes down to two dollars and 49 cents -- that 's what the government allocates for lunch .
most school districts spend two thirds of that on payroll and overhead .
that means we spend less than a dollar a day on food for kids in schools -- most schools , 80 to 90 cents . in l.a. , it 's 56 cents .
so we 're spending less than a dollar , ok , on lunch .
now i do n't know about you , but i go to starbucks and pete 's and places like that , and venti latte in san francisco is five dollars .
one gourmet coffee , one , is more -- we spend more on than we are spending to feed kids for an entire week in our schools .
you know what ? we should be ashamed .
we , as a country , should be ashamed at that .
the richest country .
in our country , it 's the kids that need it the most , who get this really , really lousy food .
it 's the kids who have parents and grandparents and uncles and aunts that ca n't even afford to pay for school lunch that gets this food .
and those are the same kids who are going to be getting sick .
those are the same kids who we should be taking care of .
we can all make a difference .
that every single one of us , whether we have children , whether we care about children , whether we have nieces or nephews , or anything -- that we can make a difference .
whether you sit down and eat a meal with your kids , whether you take your kids , or grandchildren , or nieces and nephews shopping to a farmers ' market . just do tastings with them .
sit down and care .
and on the macro level , we 're in what seems to be a 19 - month presidential campaign , and of all the things we 're asking all of these potential leaders , what about asking for the health of our children ?
thank you .
