i think the future of this planet depends on humans , not technology , and we already have the knowledge --
we 're kind of at the endgame with knowledge . but we 're nowhere near the endgame when it comes to our perception .
we still have one foot in the dark ages .
and when you listen to some of the presentations here -- and the extraordinary range of human capability , our understandings -- and then you contrast it with the fact we still call this planet , " earth : " it 's pretty extraordinary --
we have one foot in the dark ages .
just quickly : aristotle , his thing was , " it 's not flat , stupid , it 's round . "
galileo -- he had the inquisition , so he had to be a little bit more polite --
his was , " it 's not in the middle , you know . "
and hawkes : " it 's not earth , stupid , it 's ocean . "
this is an ocean planet .
t.s. eliot really said it for me -- and this should give you goose bumps : " we shall not cease from exploration and the end of our exploring shall be to return where we started and know the place for the first time . "
and the next lines are , " through the unknown remembered gate , where the last of earth discovered is that which is the beginning . "
so i have one message .
it seems to me that we 're all pointed in the wrong direction .
for the rocketeers in the audience : i love what you 're doing , i admire the guts , i admire the courage -- but your rockets are pointed in the wrong goddamn direction .
and it 's all a question of perspective .
let me try and tell you --
i do n't mean to insult you , but look , if i -- and i 'm not doing this for real because it would be an insult , so i 'm going to pretend , and it softens the blow --
i 'm going to tell you what you 're thinking .
if i held up a square that was one foot square and the color of earth , and i held up another square that was the root two square -- so it 's 1.5 times bigger -- and was the color of the oceans ; and i said , what is the relative value of these two things ?
well , it 's the relative importance .
you would say -- yeah , yeah , yeah , we all know this ;
water covers twice the area of the planet than dry land .
but it 's a question of perception ,
and if that 's what you 're thinking , if that 's what you think i mean when i say , " this is an ocean planet stupidly called ' earth . ' "
if you think that that 's the relative importance , two to one , you 're wrong by a factor of ten .
now , you 're not as thick as two short planks , but you sound like it when you say " earth , " because that demonstration , if i turned around this way -- that earth plane would be as thin as paper .
it 's a thin film , two - dimensional existence .
the ocean representation would have a depth to it .
and if you hefted those two things you might find that the relative scale of those is 20 to 1 .
it turns out that something more than 94 percent of life on earth is aquatic .
that means that us terrestrials occupy a minority .
the problem we have in believing that is -- you just have to give up this notion that this earth was created for us .
because it 's a problem we have .
if this is an ocean planet and we only have a small minority of this planet , it just interferes with a lot of what humanity thinks .
okay . let me criticize this thing .
i 'm not talking about james cameron -- although i could , but i wo n't .
you really do have to go and see his latest film , " aliens of the deep . " it 's incredible .
it features two of these deep rovers , and i can criticize them because these sweet things are mine .
this , i think , represents one of the most beautiful classic submersibles built .
if you look at that sub , you 'll see a sphere .
this is an acryclic sphere .
it generates all of the buoyancy , all of the payload for the craft , and the batteries are down here hanging underneath , exactly like a balloon .
this is the envelope , and this is the gondola , the payload .
also coming up later for criticism are these massive lights .
and this one actually carries two great manipulators .
it actually is a very good working sub -- that 's what it was designed for .
the problem with it is -- and the reason i will never build another one like it -- is that this is a product of two - dimensional thinking .
it 's what we humans do when we go in the ocean as engineers ;
we take all our terrestrial hang - ups , all our constraints -- importantly , these two - dimensional constraints that we have , and they 're so constrained we do n't even understand it -- and we take them underwater .
you notice that jim cameron is sitting in a seat .
a seat works in a two - dimensional world , where gravity blasts down on that seat , ok ?
and in a two - dimensional world , we do know about the third dimension but we do n't use it because to go up requires an awful lot of energy against gravity .
and then our mothers tell us , " careful you do n't fall down " -- because you 'll fall over .
now , go into the real atmosphere of this planet .
this planet has an inner atmosphere of water ;
it 's its inner atmosphere . it has two atmospheres --
a lesser , outer gaseous atmosphere , a lighter one .
most of life on earth is in that inner atmosphere .
and that life enjoys a three - dimensional existence , which is alien to us .
fish do not sit in seats .
they do n't . their mothers do n't say to little baby fish , " careful you do n't fall over . "
they do n't fall over . they do n't fall .
they live in a three - dimensional world where there is no difference in energy between going this way , that way , that way or that way .
it 's truly a three - dimensional space .
and we 're only just beginning to grasp it .
i do n't know of any other submersible , or even remote , that just takes advantage that this is a three - dimensional space .
this is the way we should be going into the oceans .
this is a three - dimensional machine .
what we need to do is go down into the ocean with the freedom of the animals , and move in this three - dimensional space .
ok , this is good stuff .
this is man 's first attempt at flying underwater .
right now , i 'm just coming down on this gorgeous , big , giant manta ray .
she has twice the wingspan that i do .
there i 'm coming ; she sees me .
and just notice how she rolls under and turns ;
she does n't sit there and try and blow air into a tank and kind of flow up or sink down -- she just rolls .
and the craft that i 'm in -- this has n't been shown before .
chris asked us to show stuff that has n't been shown before .
i wanted you to notice that she actually turned to come back up .
there i am ; i see her coming back , coming up underneath me .
i put reverse thrust and i try and pull gently down .
i 'm trying to do everything very gently .
we spent about three hours together and she 's beginning to trust me .
and this ballet is controlled by this lady here .
she gets about that close and then she pulls away .
so now i try and go after her , but i 'm practicing flying .
this is the first flying machine . this was the first prototype .
this was a fly by wire . it has wings .
there 're no silly buoyancy tanks -- it 's permanently , positively buoyant .
and then by moving through the water it 's able to take that control .
now , look at that ; look , it 's -- she just blew me away .
she just rolled right away from underneath . really that 's the only real dive i 've ever made in this machine .
it took 10 years to build .
but this lady here taught me , hah , taught me so much .
we just learned so much in three hours in the water there .
i just had to go and build another machine .
but look here . instead of blowing tanks and coming up slowly without thinking about it , it 's a little bit of back pressure , and that sub just comes straight back up out of the water .
this is an internal sony camera . thank you , sony .
i do n't really look that ugly , but the camera is so close that it 's just distorted .
now , there she goes , right overhead .
this is a wide - angle camera .
she 's just a few inches off the top of my head .
" aah , ha , oh , he just crossed over the top of my head about , oh , i do n't know , just so close . " i come back up , not for air .
" this is an incredible encounter with a manta . i 'm speechless .
we 've been just feet apart . i 'm going back down now . " okay , can we cut that ? lights back up please .
trying to fly and keep up with that animal -- it was n't the lack of maneuverability that we had . it was the fact she was going so slow .
i actually designed that to move faster through the water
because i thought that was the thing that we needed to do : to move fast and get range .
but after that encounter i really did want to go back with that animal and dance .
she wanted to dance .
and so what we needed to do was increase the wing area so that we just had more grip , develop higher forces .
so the sub that was outside last year -- this is the one .
you see the larger wing area here .
also , clearly , it was such a powerful thing , we wanted to try and bring other people but we could n't figure out how to do it .
so we opened the world 's first flight school .
the rational for the world 's first flight school goes something like : when the coastguards come up to me and say -- they used to leave us alone when we were diving these goofy little spherical things ,
but when we started flying around in underwater jet fighters they got a little nervous --
they would come up and say , " do you have a license for that ? "
and then i 'd put my sunglasses on , the beard that would all sprout out , and i would say , " i do n't need no stinking license . "
" i write these stinking license , " which i do .
so bob gelfond 's around here -- but somebody in the audience here has license number 20 .
they 're one of the first subsea aviators .
so we 've run two flight schools .
where the hell that goes , i do n't know , but it 's a lot of fun .
what comes next in 30 seconds ? i ca n't tell you .
but the patent for underwater flight -- karen and i , we were looking at it ,
some business partners wanted us to patent it --
we were n't sure about that .
we 've decided we 're just going to let that go .
it just seems wrong to try and patent -- -- the freedom for underwater flight .
so anybody who wants to copy us and come and join us , go for it .
the other thing is that we 've got much lower costs .
we developed some other technology called spider optics , and craig ventner asked me to make an announcement here this morning :
we 're going to be building a beautiful , little , small version of this -- unmanned , super deep -- for his boat to go and get back some deep sea dna stuff .
thank you .
