what i want to do today is to spend some time talking about some stuff that 's sort of giving me a little bit of existential angst , for lack of a better word , over the past couple of years , and
basically , these three quotes tell what 's going on .
" when god made the color purple , god was just showing off , " alice walker
wrote in " the color purple , " and zora neale hurston wrote in
" dust tracks on a road , "
" research is a formalized curiosity . it 's poking and prying with a purpose . " and then finally ,
when i think about the near future , you know , we have this attitude , well , whatever happens , happens . right ?
so that goes along with the chesire cat saying , " if you do n't care much
where you want to get to , it does n't much matter which way you go . " but i think it does matter which way we go , and what road we take , because when i think about design in the near future , what i think are the most
crucial and vital is that we need to revitalize the arts and sciences right now in 2002 .
as 10 , 20 , 15 years from now , that means that what we do today is going to be critically important ,
because in the year 2015 , and the year 2020 , 2025 , the world our society is going to be building on , the basic knowledge and abstract ideas , the discoveries that we came up with today ,
just as all these wonderful things we 're
hearing about here at the ted conference that we take for granted in the world right now , were really knowledge and ideas that came up in the '50s , the '60s , and the '70s . that 's the substrate that we 're exploiting today , whether it 's the internet , genetic engineering , laser scanners , guided missiles , fiber optics , high - definition television , sensing , remote - sensing from space and the wonderful remote - sensing photos that we see in 3d weaving , tv programs like tracker ,
and enterprise , cd rewrite drives , flatscreen , alvin ailey 's suite otis , or sarah jones ' " your revolution will not
be between these thighs , " which
by the way was banned by the fcc ,
or ska , all of these things
without question , almost without exception , are really based on ideas
and abstract and creativity from years before , so we have to ask ourselves ,
what are we contributing to that legacy
right now ? and when i think about it , i 'm really worried . to be quite frank , i 'm concerned . i 'm skeptical
that we 're doing very much of anything . we 're , in a sense , failing to act
in the future . we 're purposefully ,
consciously being laggards .
we 're lagging behind . frantz fanon , who was a psychiatrist from martinique , said , " each generation must , out of relative obscurity , discover its mission , and fulfill or betray it . " what is our mission ? what do we have to do ? i think our mission is
to reconcile , to reintegrate
science and the arts , because right now
there 's a schism that exists in popular culture . you know , people have this idea that science
and the arts are really separate .
we think of them as separate and different things , and this idea was probably introduced centuries ago ,
but it 's really becoming critical now , because we 're making decisions about our
society every day that , if we keep thinking that the arts
are separate from the sciences ,
and we keep thinking it 's cute to say , " i do n't understand anything about this one , i do n't understand anything about the other one , " then we 're going to have problems . now i know no one here at ted thinks this . all of us , we already know
that they 're very connected , but i 'm going
to let you know that some folks
in the outside world , believe it or not , they think it 's neat when they say ,
" you know , scientists and science is not
creative . maybe scientists are ingenious , but they 're not creative .
and then we have this tendency , the career counselors and various people say things
like , " artists are not analytical . they 're ingenious , perhaps ,
but not analytical , " and when these concepts underly our teaching
and what we think about the world , then we have a problem , because we stymie support for everything .
by accepting this dichotomy ,
whether it 's tongue - in - cheek , when we attempt to accommodate it in our world ,
and we try to build our foundation for the world , we 're messing up the future , because , who wants to be uncreative ? who wants to be illogical ? talent would run from either of these fields if you said you had to choose either . then they 're going to go to something
where they think , " well , i can be creative
and logical at the same time . " now i grew up in the '60s and i 'll admit it ,
actually , my childhood spanned the '60s ,
and i was a wannabe hippie and i always resented the fact that i was n't really
old enough to be a hippie .
and i know there are people here , the younger generation who want to be hippies ,
but people talk about the '60s all the time ,
and they talk about the anarchy that was there , but when i think about
the '60s , what i took away from it was
that there was hope for the future .
we thought everyone could participate . there were wonderful , incredible ideas that were always _UNK_ ,
and so much of what 's cool or hot today is really based on some of those concepts ,
whether it 's , you know , people trying to use the prime directive from star trek being involved in things , or again that three - dimensional weaving and
fax machines that i read about in my
weekly readers that the technology and engineering was just getting started .
but the '60s left me with a problem .
you see , i always assumed i would go
but i also loved the arts and sciences . you see , when i was growing up as
a little girl and as a teenager , i loved designing and making dogs ' clothes and wanting to be a fashion designer . i took art and ceramics . i loved dance . lola falana . alvin ailey . jerome robbins . and i also avidly followed the gemini and the apollo programs .
i had science projects and tons of astronomy books . i took calculus and philosophy .
i wondered about the infinity
and the big bang theory . and when i was at stanford , i found myself , my senior year , chemical engineering major , half the folks thought i was a political science and performing arts major , which was sort of true because i was black student union president
and i did major in some other things , and i found myself the last quarter juggling
chemical engineering separation processes ,
logic classes , nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy , and also producing
and choreographing a dance production , and i had to do the lighting and the
design work , and i was trying to figure out ,
do i go to new york city or do i go to medical school ?
now , my mother helped me figure
that one out . but when i went into space ,
when i went into space i carried a number of things up with me . i carried a poster
by alvin ailey , which you can figure out now , i love the dance company .
an alvin ailey poster of judith jamison
performing the dance " cry , " dedicated to all
black women everywhere . a bundu statue ,
which was from the women 's society in sierra leone , and a certificate for the
chicago public school students to work to improve their science and math ,
and folks asked me ,
" why did you take up what you took up ? "
and i had to say , " because it represents human creativity ,
the creativity that allowed us , that we were required to have to conceive and build and launch the space shuttle , springs from the same source as the imagination and
analysis it took to carve a bundu statue ,
or the ingenuity it took to design , choreograph , and stage " cry . "
each one of them are different manifestations , incarnations , of creativity ,
avatars of human creativity , and that 's what we have to reconcile in our minds , how these things fit together . the difference between arts and sciences
is not analytical versus intuitive , right ?
e = mc squared required
an intuitive leap , and then you had to do the analysis afterwards . einstein said , in fact , " the most beautiful
thing we can experience is the mysterious . it is the source of all true art and science . " dance requires us to express and want
to express the jubilation in life , but then you have to figure out , exactly
what movement do i do to make sure that it comes across correctly ?
the difference between arts and sciences
is also not constructive versus deconstructive , right ? a lot of people think of the sciences as deconstructive .
you have to pull things apart . and yeah , sub - atomic physics
is deconstructive . you literally try to
tear atoms apart to understand what 's inside of them . but sculpture , from what i understand from great sculptors ,
is deconstructive , because you see a piece and you remove what does n't
biotechnology is constructive . orchestral arranging is constructive .
so in fact we use constructive and
deconstructive techniques in everything .
the difference between science and the arts is not that they are different sides of the same coin , even , or even different parts
of the same continuum , but rather
they 're manifestations of the same thing . different quantum states of an atom ?
or maybe if i want to be more 21st century
i could say that they are different harmonic
resonances of a superstring .
but we 'll leave that alone . they spring from the same source .
the arts and sciences are avatars of human creativity . it 's our attempt as humans to build an understanding
of the universe , the world around us .
it 's our attempt to influence things ,
the universe internal to ourselves
and external to us . the sciences , to me , are manifestations
of our attempt to express
or share our understanding , our experience , to influence the universe
external to ourselves . it does n't rely on us as individuals .
by everyone , and the arts manifest our desire , our attempt to share
or influence others through experiences that are peculiar to us as individuals . let me say it again another way :
science provides an understanding
of a universal experience , and arts provides a universal understanding
of a personal experience . that 's what we have to think about , that they 're all part of us , they 're all part of a continuum . it 's not just the tools , it 's not just
the sciences , you know , the mathematics
and the numerical stuff and the statistics , because we heard , very much on this stage , people talked about music
being mathematical . right ? arts do n't just use clay , are n't the only ones that use clay , light and sound and movement . they use analysis as well .
so people might say , well , i still like that intuitive versus analytical thing , because everybody wants to do the right brain , left brain thing , right ?
we 've all been accused of being
right - brained or left - brained at some point
in time , depending on who
we disagreed with .
you know , people say intuitive , you know that 's like you 're in touch with nature ,
in touch with yourself and relationships . analytical : you put your mind to work , and i 'm going to tell you a little secret . you all
know this though , but sometimes people
use this analysis idea , that things are
outside of ourselves , to be , say , that this is what we 're going to elevate
as the true , most important sciences , right ?
and then you have artists , and you all
know this is true as well , artists will say things about scientists because they say they 're too concrete ,
they 're disconnected with the world .
but , we 've even had that here on stage ,
so do n't act like you do n't know what i 'm talking about . we had folks talking about the flat earth society and flower arrangers , so there 's
