dogs have interests .
they have interest sniffing each other , chasing squirrels .
and if we do n't make that a reward in training , that will be a distraction .
it 's always sort of struck me as really a scary thought that if you see a dog in a park , and the owner is calling it , and the owner says , you know , " puppy , come here , come here , " and the dog thinks , " hmm , interesting .
i 'm sniffing this other dog 's rear end , the owner 's calling . " it 's a difficult choice , right ?
i mean , you lose .
you cannot compete with the environment , if you have an adolescent dog 's brain .
so , when we train , we 're always trying to take into account the dog 's point of view .
now , i 'm here largely because there 's kind of a rift in dog training at the moment that -- on one side , we have people who think that you train a dog , number one , by making up rules , human rules . we do n't take the dog 's point of view into account .
so the human says , " you 're going to act this way , damn it .
we 're going to force you to act against your will , to bend to our will . " then , number two , we keep these rules a secret from the dog .
and then number three , now we can punish the dog for breaking rules he did n't even know existed . so you get a little puppy , he comes . his only crime is he grew .
when he was a little puppy , he puts his paws on your leg -- you know , is n't that nice ? and you go , " oh , there 's a good boy . " you bend down , you pat him -- you reward him for jumping up .
his one mistake is he 's a tibetan mastiff , and a few months later , he weighs , you know , 80 pounds .
every time he jumps up , he gets all sorts of abuse .
i mean , it is really very , very scary the abuse that dogs get .
so , this whole dominance issue -- number one , what we get in dog training is this mickey - mouse interpretation of a very complicated social system .
and they take this stuff seriously .
male dogs are very serious about a hierarchy , because it prevents physical fights .
of course , female dogs , bitches , on the other hand , have several bitch amendments to male hierarchical rule .
the number one is , " i have it , you do n't . "
and what you will find is a very , very low - ranking bitch will quite easily keep a bone away from a high - ranking male .
so , we get in dog training this notion of dominances , or of the alpha dog . i 'm sure that you 've heard this .
dogs get so abused .
dogs , horses and humans -- these are the three species which are so abused in life .
and the reason is built into their behavior -- is to always come back and apologize .
like , " oh , i 'm sorry you had to beat me . i 'm really sorry , yes , it 's my fault . "
they are just so beatable ,
and that 's why they get beaten .
the poor puppy jumps up , you open the dog book , what does it say ? " hold his front paws , squeeze his front paws , stamp on his hind feet , squirt him in the face with lemon juice , hit him on the head with a rolled - up newspaper , knee him in the chest , flip him over backwards . " because he grew ?
and because he 's performing a behavior you 've trained him to do ?
this is insanity .
i ask owners , " well , how would you like the dog to greet you ? " and people say , " well , i do n't know , to sit , i guess . " i said , " let 's teach him to sit . " and then we give him a reason for sitting .
because the first stage is basically teaching a dog esl .
i could speak to you and say , " laytay - chai , paisey , paisey . " go on , something should happen now .
why are n't you responding ? oh , you do n't speak swahili .
well , i 've got news for you . the dog does n't speak english , or american , or spanish , or french .
so the first stage in training is to teach the dog esl , english as a second language .
and that 's how we use the food lure in the hand , and we use food because we 're dealing with owners .
my wife does n't need food -- she 's a great trainer ,
much better than i am. i do n't need food , but the average owner says , " puppy , sit . " or they go , " sit , sit , sit . " they 're making a hand signal in front of the dog 's rectum for some reason , like the dog has a third eye there -- it 's insane .
you know , " sit , sit . " no , we go , " puppy , sit " -- boom , it 's got it in six to 10 trials .
then we phase out the food as a lure , and now the dog knows that " sit " means sit ,
and you can actually communicate to a dog in a perfectly constructed english sentence .
" phoenix , come here , take this , and go to jamie , please . " and i 've taught her " phoenix , " " come here , " " take this , " " go to " and the name of my son , " jamie . "
and the dog can take a note , and i 've got my own little search - and - rescue dog .
he 'll find jamie wherever he is , you know , wherever kids are , crushing rocks by a stream or something , and take him a little message that says , " hey , dinner 's ready . come in for dinner . " so , at this point , the dog knows what we want it to do .
will it do it ?
not necessarily , no.
as i said , if he 's in the park and there 's a rear end to sniff , why come to the owner ?
the dog lives with you , the dog can get you any time . the dog can sniff your butt , if you like , when he wants to .
at the moment , he 's in the park , and you are competing with smells , and other dogs , and squirrels .
so the second stage in training is to teach the dog to want to do what we want him to do , and this is very easy .
we use the premack principle .
basically , we follow a low - frequency behavior -- one the dog does n't want to do -- by a high - frequency behavior , commonly known as a behavior problem , or a dog hobby -- something the dog does like to do .
that will then become a reward for the lower - frequency behavior .
so we go , " sit , " on the couch ; " sit , " tummy - rub ; " sit , "
look , i throw a tennis ball ; " sit , " say hello to that other dog .
yes , we put " sniff butt " on queue .
" sit , " sniff butt .
so now all of these distractions that worked against training now become rewards that work for training .
and what we 're doing , in essence , is we 're teaching the dog , kind of like -- we 're letting the dog think that the dog is training us .
and i can imagine this dog , you know , speaking through the fence to , say , an akita , saying , " wow , my owners , they are so incredibly easy to train .
they 're like golden retrievers .
all i have to do is sit , and they do everything .
they open doors , they drive my car , they massage me , they will throw tennis balls , they will cook for me and serve the food .
it 's like , if i just sit , that 's my command . then i have my own personal doorman , chauffeur , masseuse , chef and waiter . " and now the dog 's really happy .
and this , to me , is always what training is .
so we really motivate the dog to want to do it , such that the need for punishment seldom comes up .
now we move to phase three , when now --
there 's times , you know , when daddy knows best .
and i have a little sign on my fridge , and it says , " because i 'm the daddy , that 's why . "
sorry , no more explanation . " i 'm the daddy , you 're not . sit . " and there 's times , for example , if my son 's friends leave the door open , the dogs have to know you do n't step across this line .
this is a life - or - death thing .
you leave this , the sanctity of your house , and you could be hit on the street .
so some things we have to let the dog know , " you must n't do this . " and so we have to enforce , but without force .
people here get very confused about what a punishment is .
they think a punishment is something nasty .
i bet a lot of you do , right ?
you think it 's something painful , or scary , or nasty .
it does n't have to be .
there 's several definitions of what a punishment is ,
but one definition , the most popular , is : a punishment is a stimulus that reduces the immediately preceding behavior , such that it 's less likely to occur in the future .
it does not have to be nasty , scary or painful .
and i would say , if it does n't have to be , then maybe it should n't be .
i was working with a very dangerous dog about a year ago . and this was a dog that put both his owners in hospital , plus the brother - in - law , plus the child .
and i only agreed to work with it if they promised it would stay in their house , and they never took it outside .
the dog is actually euthanized now , but this was a dog i worked with for a while .
a lot of the aggression happened around the kitchen ,
so while i was there -- this was on the fourth visit -- we did a four and a half hour down - stay , with the dog on his mat .
and he was kept there by the owner 's calm insistence .
when the dog would try to leave the mat , she would say , " rover , on the mat , on the mat , on the mat . "
the dog broke his down - stay 22 times in four and a half hours , while she cooked dinner ,
because we had a lot of aggression related towards food .
the breaks got fewer and fewer .
you see , the punishment was working .
the behavior problem was going away .
she never raised her voice .
if she did , she would have got bitten .
it 's not a good dog you shout at .
and a lot of my friends train really neat animals , grizzly bears -- if you 've ever seen a grizzly bear on the telly or in film , then it 's a friend of mine who 's trained it --
how are you going to reprimand a grizzly bear ?
" bad bear , bad bear ! " voom !
your head now is 100 yards away , sailing through the air , ok ?
this is crazy .
so , where do we go from here ?
we want a better way .
dogs deserve better .
but for me , the reason for this actually has to do with dogs .
it has to do with watching people train puppies , and realizing they have horrendous interaction skills , horrendous relationship skills .
not just with their puppy , but with the rest of the family at class .
i mean , my all - time classic is another " come here " one .
you see someone in the park -- and i 'll cover my mic when i say this , because i do n't want to wake you up -- and there 's the owner in the park , and their dog 's over here , and they say , " rover , come here .
rover , come here . rover , come here , you son of a bitch . "
the dog says , " i do n't think so . " i mean , who in their right mind would think that a dog would want to approach them when they 're screaming like that ?
instead , the dog says , " i know that tone . i know that tone . previously , when i 've approached , i 've gotten punished there . " i was walking onto a plane -- this , for me , was a pivotal moment in my career , and it really cemented what i wanted to do with this whole puppy - training thing , the notion of how to teach puppies in a dog - friendly way to want to do what we want to do , so we do n't have to force them .
you know , i puppy - train my child .
and the seminal moment was , i was getting on a plane in dallas , and in row two was a father , i presume , and a young boy about five ,
kicking the back of the chair . " johnny , do n't do that . " kick , kick , kick .
" johnny , do n't do that . " kick , kick , kick .
i 'm standing right here with my bag .
the father leans over , grabs him like this and gives him ugly face .
and ugly face is this --
when you go face - to - face with a puppy or a child , you say , " what are you doing ! now stop it , stop it , stop it ! " and i went , " oh my god , do i do something ? " that child has lost everything -- that one of the two people he can trust in this world has absolutely pulled the rug from under his feet .
and i thought , " do i tell this jerk to quit it ? " i thought , " ian , stay out of it , stay out of it , you know , walk on . " i walked to the back of the plane ,
i sat down , and a thought came to me .
if that had been a dog , i would have laid him out .
if he had kicked a dog , i would have punched him out .
he kicked a child , grabs the child like this and i let it go .
and this is what it 's all about .
these relationship skills are so easy .
i mean , we as humans , our shallowness when we choose a life - mate based on the three cs -- coat color , conformation , cuteness .
you know , kind of like a little robot .
this is how we go into a relationship , and it 's hunky - dory for a year .
and then , a little behavior problem comes up . no different from the dog barking .
the husband wo n't clear up his clothes , or the wife 's always late for meetings , whatever it is , ok ?
and our personal feedback -- there 's two things about it .
when you watch people interacting with animals or other people , there is very little feedback , it 's too infrequent .
and when it happens , it 's bad , it 's nasty .
you see it 's especially in families , especially with spouses , especially with children , especially with parents . especially from boss to employee .
it 's as if there 's some schadenfreude there ,
that we actually take delight in people getting things wrong , so that we can then moan and groan and bitch at them .
and this , i would say , is the biggest human foible that we have .
it really is .
we take the good for granted , and we moan and groan at the bad .
and i think this whole notion of these skills should be taught .
you know , calculus is wonderful .
when i was a kid , i was a calculus whiz .
i do n't understand a thing about it now , but i could do it as a kid .
geometry , fantastic . you know , quantum mechanics -- these are cool things .
but they do n't save marriages and they do n't raise children .
and my look to the future is , and what i want to do with this doggy stuff , is to teach people that you know , your husband 's just as easy to train .
probably easier -- if you got a rottie -- much easier to train .
your kids are easy to train .
all you 've got to do is to watch them , to time - sample the behavior , and say , every five minutes , you ask the question , " is it good , or is it bad ? "
if it 's good , say , " that was really neat , thank you . "
that is such a powerful training technique . this should be taught in schools .
relationships -- how do you negotiate ?
how you do negotiate with your friend who wants your toy ?
you know , how to prepare you for your first relationship ?
how on earth about raising children ?
we think how we do it -- one night in bed , we 're pregnant , and then we 're raising the most important thing in life , a child .
no , this is what should be taught -- the good living , the good habits , which are just as hard to break as bad habits .
so , that would be my wish to the future .
