so the question is , what is invisible ?
there is more of it than you think , actually .
everything , i would say . everything that matters except every thing and except matter . we can see matter . but we ca n't see what 's the matter .
as in this cryptic sentence i found in the guardian recently :
" the marriage suffered a setback in 1965 , when the husband was killed by the wife . "
there 's a world of invisibility there , is n't there ?
so , we can see the stars and the planets ,
but we ca n't see what holds them apart or what draws them together .
with matter , as with people , we see only the skin of things .
we ca n't see into the engine room .
we ca n't see what makes people tick , at least not without difficulty .
and the closer we look at anything , the more it disappears .
in fact , if you look really closely at stuff , if you look at the basic substructure of matter , there is n't anything there .
electrons disappear in a kind of fuzz , and there is only energy . and you ca n't see energy .
so everything that matters , that 's important , is invisible .
one slightly silly thing that 's invisible is this story , which is invisible to you .
and i 'm now going to make it visible to you in your minds .
it 's about an m.p. called geoffrey dickens .
the late geoffrey dickens , m.p. was attending a fete in his constituency .
wherever he went , at every stall he stopped he was closely followed by a devoted smiling woman of indescribable ugliness .
try as he might , he could n't get away from her .
a few days later he received a letter from a constituent saying how much she admired him , had met him at a fete and asking for a signed photograph .
after her name , written in brackets was the apt description , horse face .
" i 've misjudged this women , " thought mr. dickens .
" not only is she aware of her physical repulsiveness , she turns it to her advantage .
a photo is not enough . "
so he went out and bought a plastic frame to put the photograph in .
and on the photograph , he wrote with a flourish , " to horse face , with love from geoffrey dickens , m.p. "
after it had been sent off , his secretary said to him , " did you get that letter from the woman at the fete ?
i wrote horse face on her , so you 'd remember who she was . "
i bet he thought he wished he was invisible , do n't you ?
so , one of the interesting things about invisibility is that things that we ca n't see we also ca n't understand .
gravity is one thing that we ca n't see and which we do n't understand .
it 's the least understood of all the four fundamental forces , and the weakest .
and nobody really knows what it is or why it 's there .
for what it 's worth , sir isaac newton , the greatest scientist who ever lived , he thought jesus came to earth specifically to operate the levers of gravity .
that 's what he thought he was there for .
so , bright guy , could be wrong on that one , i do n't know .
consciousness . i see all your faces .
i have no idea what any of you are thinking . is n't that amazing ?
is n't that incredible that we ca n't read each other 's minds ?
but we can touch each other , taste each other perhaps , if we get close enough .
but we ca n't read each other 's minds . i find that quite astonishing .
in the sufi faith , this great middle eastern religion , which some claim is the route of all religions , sufi masters are all telepaths , so they say .
but their main exercise of telepathy is to send out powerful signals to the rest of us that it does n't exist .
so that 's why we do n't think it exists , the sufi masters working on us .
in the question of consciousness and artificial intelligence ,
artificial intelligence has really , like the study of consciousness , gotten nowhere . we have no idea how consciousness works .
with artificial intelligence , not only have they not created artificial intelligence , they have n't yet created artificial stupidity .
the laws of physics : invisible , eternal , omnipresent , all - powerful .
remind you of anyone ?
interesting . i 'm , as you can guess , not a materialist , i 'm an immaterialist .
and i 've found a very useful new word , ignostic . okay ?
i 'm an ignostic .
i refuse to be drawn on the question of whether god exists , until somebody properly defines the terms .
another thing we ca n't see is the human genome .
and this is increasingly peculiar ,
because about 20 years ago , when they started delving into the genome , they thought it would probably contain around 100,000 genes .
geneticists will know this , but every year since , it 's been revised downwards .
we now think there are likely to be only just over 20,000 genes in the human genome .
this is extraordinary . because rice -- get this -- rice is known to have 38 thousand genes .
potatoes , potatoes have 48 chromosomes . do you know that ?
two more than people ,
and the same as a gorilla .
you ca n't see these things , but they are very strange .
the stars by day . i always think that 's fascinating .
the universe disappears .
the more light there is , the less you can see .
time , nobody can see time .
i do n't know if you know this . modern physics , there is a big movement in modern physics to decide that time does n't really exist ,
because it 's too inconvenient for the figures .
it 's much easier if it 's not really there .
you ca n't see the future , obviously .
and you ca n't see the past , except in your memory .
one of the interesting things about the past is you particularly ca n't see . my son asked me this the other day , he said , " dad , can you remember what i was like when i was two ? "
and i said , " yes . " and he said , " why ca n't i ? "
is n't that extraordinary ? you cannot remember what happened to you earlier than the age of two or three ,
which is great news for psychoanalysts ,
because otherwise they 'd be out of a job .
because that 's where all the stuff happens that makes you who you are .
another thing you ca n't see is the grid on which we hang .
this is fascinating . you probably know , some of you , that cells are continually renewed . you can see it in skin and this kind of stuff .
skin flakes off , hairs grow , nails , that kind of stuff .
but every cell in your body is replaced at some point .
taste buds , every 10 days or so .
livers and internal organs sort of take a bit longer . a spine takes several years .
but at the end of seven years , not one cell in your body remains from what was there seven years ago .
the question is , who , then , are we ?
what are we ? what is this thing that we hang on , that is actually us ?
okay . atoms , you ca n't see them .
nobody ever will . they 're smaller than the wavelength of light .
gas , you ca n't see that .
interesting . somebody mentioned 1600 recently .
gas was invented in 1600 by a dutch chemist called van helmont .
it 's said to be the most successful ever invention of a word by a known individual .
quite good . he also invented a word called " blas , " meaning astral radiation .
did n't catch on , unfortunately .
but well done , him .
there is so many things that -- light .
you ca n't see light . when it 's dark , in a vacuum , if a person shines a beam of light straight across your eyes , you wo n't see it . slightly technical , some physicists will disagree with this .
but it 's odd that you ca n't see the beam of light , you can only see what it hits .
i find that extraordinary , not to be able to see light , not to be able to see darkness .
electricity , you ca n't see that .
do n't let anyone tell you they understand electricity .
they do n't . nobody knows what it is .
you probably think the electrons in an electric wire move instantaneously down a wire , do n't you , at the speed of light when you turn the light on . they do n't .
electrons bumble down the wire , about the speed of spreading honey , they say .
galaxies , 100 billion of them estimated in the universe .
100 billion . how many can we see ? five .
five out of the 100 billion galaxies , with the naked eye ,
and one of them is quite difficult to see unless you 've got very good eyesight .
radio waves . there 's another thing .
heinrich hertz , when he discovered radio waves in 1887 , he called them radio waves because they radiated .
and somebody said to him , " well what 's the point of these , heinrich ?
what 's the point of these radio waves that you 've found ? "
and he said , " well , i 've no idea .
but i guess somebody will find a use for them someday . "
and that 's what they do , radio . that 's what they discovered .
anyway , so the biggest thing that 's invisible to us is what we do n't know .
it is incredible how little we know .
thomas edison once said , " we do n't know one percent of one millionth about anything . "
and i 've come to the conclusion -- because you 've asked this other question , " what 's another thing you ca n't see ? "
the point , most of us . what 's the point ?
you ca n't see a point . it 's by definition dimensionless , like an electron , oddly enough .
but the point , what i 've got it down to , is there are only two questions really worth asking .
" why are we here ? " and " what should we do about it while we are ?
and to help you , i 've got two things to leave you with , from two great philosophers , perhaps two of the greatest philosopher thinkers of the 20th century ,
one a mathematician and an engineer , and the other a poet .
the first is ludwig wittgenstein who said , " i do n't know why we are here .
but i 'm pretty sure it 's not in order to enjoy ourselves . "
he was a cheerful bastard was n't he ?
and secondly and lastly , w.h. auden , one of my favorite poets , who said , " we are here on earth to help others .
what the others are here for , i 've no idea . "
