in the last 50 years , we 've been building the suburbs with a lot of unintended consequences .
and i 'm going to talk about some of those consequences and just present a whole bunch of really interesting projects that i think give us tremendous reasons to be really optimistic that the big design and development project of the next 50 years is going to be retrofitting suburbia .
so whether it 's redeveloping dying malls or re - inhabiting dead big - box stores or reconstructing wetlands out of parking lots , i think the fact is the growing number of empty and under - performing , especially retail , sites throughout suburbia gives us actually a tremendous opportunity to take our least - sustainable landscapes right now and convert them into more sustainable places .
and in the process , what that allows us to do is to redirect a lot more of our growth back into existing communities that could use a boost , and have the infrastructure in place , instead of continuing to tear down trees and to tear up the green space out at the edges .
so why is this important ?
i think there are any number of reasons ,
and i 'm just going to not get into detail but mention a few .
just from the perspective of climate change , the average urban dweller in the u.s.
has about one - third the carbon footprint of the average suburban dweller , mostly because suburbanites drive a lot more , and living in detached buildings , you have that much more exterior surface to leak energy out of .
so strictly from the cities are already relatively green .
the big opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is actually in urbanizing the suburbs .
all that driving that we 've been doing out in the suburbs , we have doubled the amount of miles we drive .
it 's increased our dependence on foreign oil despite the gains in fuel efficiency .
we 're just driving so much more ; we have n't been able to keep up technologically .
public health is another reason to consider retrofitting .
researchers at the cdc and other places have increasingly been linking suburban development patterns with sedentary lifestyles .
and those have been linked then with the rather alarming , growing rates of obesity , shown in these maps here , and that obesity has also been triggering great increases in heart disease and diabetes to the point where a child born today has a one - in - three chance of developing diabetes .
and that rate has been escalating at the same rate as children not walking to school anymore , again , because of our development patterns .
and then there 's finally -- there 's the affordability question .
i mean , how affordable is it to continue to live in suburbia with rising gas prices ?
suburban expansion to cheap land , for the last 50 years -- you know the cheap land out on the edge -- has helped generations of families enjoy the american dream .
but increasingly , the savings promised by drive - till - you - qualify affordability -- which is basically our model -- those savings are wiped out when you consider the transportation costs .
for instance , here in atlanta , about half of households make between $ 20,000 and $ 50,000 a year ,
and they are spending 29 percent of their income on housing and 32 percent on transportation .
i mean , that 's 2005 figures .
that 's before we got up to the four bucks a gallon .
you know , none of us really tend to do the math on our transportation costs ,
and they 're not going down any time soon .
whether you love suburbia 's leafy privacy or you hate its soulless commercial strips , there are reasons why it 's important to retrofit .
but is it practical ?
i think it is .
june williamson and i have been researching this topic for over a decade ,
and we 've found over 80 varied projects .
but that they 're really all market driven ,
and what 's driving the market in particular --
number one -- is major demographic shifts .
we all tend to think of suburbia as this very family - focused place ,
but that 's really not the case anymore .
since 2000 , already two - thirds of households in suburbia did not have kids in them .
we just have n't caught up with the actual realities of this .
the reasons for this have a lot to with the dominance of the two big demographic groups right now : the baby boomers retiring -- and then there 's a gap , generation x , which is a small generation .
they 're still having kids --
but generation y has n't even started hitting child - rearing age .
they 're the other big generation .
so as a result of that , demographers predict that through 2025 , 75 to 85 percent of new households will not have kids in them .
and the market research , consumer research , asking the boomers and gen y what it is they would like , what they would like to live in , tells us there is going to be a huge demand -- and we 're already seeing it -- for more urban lifestyles within suburbia .
that basically , the boomers want to be able to age in place , and gen y would like to live an urban lifestyle , but most of their jobs will continue to be out in suburbia .
the other big dynamic of change is the sheer performance of underperforming asphalt .
now i keep thinking this would be a great name for an indie rock band ,
but developers generally use it to refer to underused parking lots --
and suburbia is full of them .
when the postwar suburbs were first built out on the cheap land away from downtown , it made sense to just build surface parking lots .
but those sites have now been leapfrogged and leapfrogged again , as we 've just continued to sprawl ,
and they now have a relatively central location .
it no longer just makes sense .
that land is more valuable than just surface parking lots .
it now makes sense to go back in , build a deck and build up on those sites .
so what do you do with a dead mall , dead office park ?
it turns out , all sorts of things .
in a slow economy like ours , re - inhabitation is one of the more popular strategies .
so this happens to be a dead mall in st. louis that 's been re - inhabited as art - space .
it 's now home to artist studios , theater groups , dance troupes .
it 's not pulling in as much tax revenue as it once was ,
but it 's serving its community .
it 's keeping the lights on .
it 's becoming , i think , a really great institution .
other malls have been re - inhabited as nursing homes , as universities , and as all variety of office space .
we also found a lot of examples of dead big - box stores that have been converted into all sorts of community - serving uses as well -- lots of schools , lots of churches and lots of libraries like this one .
this was a little grocery store , a food lion grocery store , that is now a public library .
in addition to , i think , doing a beautiful adaptive reuse , they tore up some of the parking spaces , put in bioswales to collect and clean the runoff , put in a lot more sidewalks to connect to the neighborhoods .
and they 've made this , what was just a store along a commercial strip , into a community gathering space .
this one is a little l - shaped strip shopping center in phoenix , arizona .
really all they did was they gave it a fresh coat of bright paint , a gourmet grocery , and they put up a restaurant in the old post office .
never underestimate the power of food to turn a place around and make it a destination .
it 's been so successful , they 've now taken over the strip across the street .
the real estate ads in the neighborhood all very proudly proclaim , " walking distance to le grande orange , " because it provided its neighborhood with what sociologists like to call " a third place . "
if home is the first place and work is the second place , the third place is where you go to hang out and build community .
and especially as suburbia is becoming less centered on the family , the family households , there 's a real hunger for more third places .
so the most dramatic retrofits are really those in the next category , the next strategy : redevelopment .
now , during the boom , there were several really dramatic redevelopment projects where the original building was scraped to the ground and then the whole site was rebuilt at significantly greater density , a sort of compact , walkable urban neighborhoods .
but some of them have been much more incremental .
this is mashpee commons , the oldest retrofit that we 've found .
and it 's just incrementally , over the last 20 years , built urbanism on top of its parking lots .
so the black and white photo shows the simple 60 's strip shopping center .
and then the maps above that show its gradual transformation into a compact , mixed - use new england village , and it has plans now that have been approved for it to connect to new residential neighborhoods across the arterials and over to the other side .
so , you know , sometimes it 's incremental .
sometimes , it 's all at once .
this is another infill project on the parking lots , this one of an office park outside of washington d.c.
when metrorail expanded transit into the suburbs and opened a station nearby to this site , the owners decided to build a new parking deck and then insert on top of their surface lots and condo buildings , while keeping the existing office buildings .
here is the site in 1940 :
it was just a little farm in the village of hyattsville .
by 1980 , it had been subdivided into a big mall on one side and the office park on the other
and then some buffer sites for a library and a church to the far right .
today , the transit , the main street and the new housing have all been built .
eventually , i expect that the streets will probably extend through a redevelopment of the mall .
plans have already been announced for a lot of those garden apartments above the mall to be redeveloped .
transit is a big driver of retrofits .
so here 's what it looks like .
you can sort of see the funky new condo buildings in between the office buildings and the public space and the new main street .
this one is one of my favorites , belmar .
i think they really built an attractive place here and have just employed all - green construction .
there 's massive p.v. arrays on the roofs as well as wind turbines .
this was a very large mall on a hundred - acre superblock .
it 's now 22 walkable urban blocks with public streets , two public parks , eight bus lines and a range of housing types ,
and so it 's really given lakewood , colorado the downtown that this particular suburb never had .
here was the mall in its heyday .
they had their prom in the mall . they loved their mall .
so here 's the site in 1975 with the mall .
by 1995 , the mall has died .
the department store has been kept --
and we found this was true in many cases .
the department stores are multistory ; they 're better built .
they 're easy to be re - adapted .
but the one story stuff ...
that 's really history .
so here it is at projected build - out .
this project , i think , has great connectivity to the existing neighborhoods .
it 's providing 1,500 households with the option of a more urban lifestyle .
it 's about two - thirds built out right now .
here 's what the new main street looks like .
it 's very successful ,
and it 's helped to prompt -- eight of the 13 regional malls in denver have now , or have announced plans to be , retrofitted .
but it 's important to note that all of this retrofitting is not occurring -- no , it 's pockets of walkability on the sites of under - performing properties .
and so it 's giving people more choices ,
but it 's not taking away choices .
but it 's also not really enough to just create pockets of walkability .
you want to also try to get more systemic transformation .
we need to also retrofit the corridors themselves .
so this is one that has been retrofitted in california .
they took the commercial strip shown on the black - and - white images below , and they built a boulevard that has become the main street for their town .
and it 's transformed from being an ugly , unsafe , undesirable address , to becoming a beautiful , attractive , dignified sort of good address .
i mean now we 're hoping we start to see it ; they 've already built city hall , attracted two hotels .
i could imagine beautiful housing going up along there without tearing down another tree .
so there 's a lot of great things ,
but i 'd love to see more corridors getting retrofitting .
but densification is not going to work everywhere .
sometimes re - greening is really the better answer .
there 's a lot to learn from successful landbanking programs in cities like flint , michigan .
there 's also a burgeoning suburban farming movement -- sort of victory gardens meets the internet .
but perhaps one of the most important re - greening aspects is the opportunity to restore the local ecology , as in this example outside of minneapolis .
when the shopping center died , the city restored the site 's original wetlands , creating lakefront property , which then attracted private investment , the first private investment to this very low - income neighborhood in over 40 years .
so they 've managed to both restore the local ecology and the local economy at the same time .
this is another re - greening example .
it also makes sense in very strong markets .
this one in seattle is on the site of a mall parking lot adjacent to a new transit stop .
and the wavy line is a path alongside a creek that has now been daylit .
the creek had been culverted under the parking lot .
but daylighting our creeks really improves their water quality and contributions to habitat .
so i 've shown you some of the first generation of retrofits .
what 's next ?
i think we have three challenges for the future .
the first is to plan retrofitting much more systemically at the metropolitan scale .
we need to be able to target which areas really should be re - greened .
where should we be redeveloping ?
and where should we be encouraging re - inhabitation ?
these slides just show two images from a larger project that looked at trying to do that for atlanta .
i led a team that was asked to imagine atlanta 100 years from now .
and we chose to try to reverse sprawl through three simple moves -- expensive , but simple .
one , in a hundred years , transit on all major rail and road corridors .
two , in a hundred years , thousand foot buffers on all stream corridors .
it 's a little extreme , but we 've got a little water problem .
in a hundred years , subdivisions that simply end up too close to water or too far from transit wo n't be viable .
and so we 've created the eco - acre transfer - to - transfer development rights to the transit corridors and allow the re - greening of those former subdivisions for food and energy production .
so the second challenge is to improve the architectural design quality of the retrofits .
and i close with this image of democracy in action :
this is a protest that 's happening on a retrofit in silver spring , maryland on an astroturf town green .
now , retrofits are often accused of being examples of faux downtowns and instant urbanism ,
and not without reason ; you do n't get much more phony than an astroturf town green .
i have to say , these are very hybrid places .
they are new but trying to look old .
they have urban streetscapes , but suburban parking ratios .
their populations are more diverse than typical suburbia , but they 're less diverse than cities .
and they are public places , but that are managed by private companies .
and just the surface appearance are often -- like the astroturf here -- they make me wince .
so , you know , i mean i 'm glad that the urbanism is doing its job .
the fact that a protest is happening really does mean that the layout of the blocks , the streets and blocks , the putting in of public space , compromised as it may be , is still a really great thing .
but we 've got to get the architecture better .
the final challenge is for all of you .
i want you to join the protest and start demanding more sustainable suburban places -- more sustainable places , period .
but culturally , we tend to think that downtowns should be dynamic , and we expect that .
but we seem to have an expectation that the suburbs should forever remain frozen in whatever adolescent form they were first given birth to .
it 's time to let them grow up ,
so i want you to all support the zoning changes , the road diets , the infrastructure improvements and the retrofits that are coming soon to a neighborhood near you .
thank you .
