my name 's seth priebatsch . i 'm the chief ninja of scvngr .
i am a proud princeton dropout .
also proud to have relocated here to boston , where i actually grew up .
yeah , boston .
easy wins . i should just go and name the counties that we 've got around here .
so , i 'm also fairly determined to try and build a game layer on top of the world .
and this is sort of a new concept , and it 's really important .
because while the last decade was the decade of social and the decade of where the framework in which we connect with other people was built , this next decade will be the decade where the game framework is built , where the motivations that we use to actually influence behavior , and the framework in which that is constructed , is decided upon , and that 's really important .
and so i say that i want to build a game layer on top of the world , but that 's not quite true because it 's already under construction ; it 's already happening .
and it looks like this right now .
it looks like the web did back in 1997 , right ?
it 's not very good . it 's cluttered .
it 's filled with lots of different things that , in short , are n't that fun .
there are credit card schemes and airline mile programs and coupon cards and all these loyalty schemes that actually do use game dynamics and actually are building the game layer : they just suck .
they 're not very well designed , right ?
so , that 's unfortunate .
but luckily , as my favorite action hero , bob the builder , says , " we can do better . we can build this better . " and the tools , the resources that we use to build a game layer are game dynamics themselves .
and so , sort of , the crux of this presentation is going to go through four really important game dynamics , really interesting things , that , if you use consciously , you can use to influence behavior , both for good , for bad , for in - between .
hopefully for good .
but this is sort of the important stages in which that framework will get built , and so we want to all be thinking about it consciously now .
just before we jump into that , there 's sort of a question of : why is this important ?
i 'm sort of making this claim that there is a game layer on top of the world , and that it 's very important that we build it properly .
the reason that it 's so important is that , the last decade , what we 've seen has been building the social layer , has been this framework for connections , and construction on that layer is over , it 's finished .
there 's still a lot to explore .
there 's still a lot of people who are trying to figure out social and how do we leverage this and how do we use this , but the framework itself is done , and it 's called facebook .
and that 's okay , right ? a lot of people are very happy with facebook .
i like it quite a lot .
they 've created this thing called the open graph , and they own all of our connections .
they own half a billion people .
and so when you want to build on the social layer , the framework has been decided ; it is the open graph api .
and if you 're happy with that , fantastic .
if you 're not , too bad . there 's nothing you can do .
but this next decade -- and that 's a real thing .
i mean , we want to build frameworks in a way that makes it acceptable and makes it , you know , productive down the road .
so , the social layer is all about these connections .
the game layer is all about influence .
it 's not about adding a social fabric to the web and connecting you to other people everywhere you are and everywhere you go .
it 's actually about using dynamics , using forces , to influence the behavior of where you are , what you do there , how you do it .
that 's really , really powerful , and it 's going to be more important than the social layer .
it 's going to affect our lives more deeply and perhaps more invisibly .
and so it 's incredibly critical that at this moment , while it 's just getting constructed , while the frameworks like facebook , like the open graph , are being created for the game layer equivalent , that we think about it very consciously , and that we do it in a way that is open , that is available , and that can be leveraged for good .
and so that 's what i want to talk about for game dynamics , because construction has just begun , and the more consciously we can think about this , the better we 'll be able to use it for anything that we want .
so like i said , the way that you go through and build on the game layer is not with glass and steel and cement .
and the resources that we use are not this two - dimensional swath of land that we have .
the resources are mindshare and the tools , the raw materials are these game dynamics .
so with that , you know , a couple game dynamics to talk about .
four . back at scvngr , we like to joke that with seven game dynamics , you can get anyone to do anything .
and so today , i 'm going to show you four , because i hope to have a competitive advantage at the end of this , still .
so the first one , it 's a very simple game dynamic .
it 's called the appointment dynamic .
and this is a dynamic in which to succeed , players have to do something at a predefined time , generally at a predefined place .
and these dynamics are a little scary sometimes , because you think , you know , other people can be using forces that will manipulate how i interact : what i do , where i do it , when i do it .
this sort of loss of free will that occurs in games can be frightening , so with each dynamic , i 'm going to give three examples : one that shows how this is already being used in the real world , so you can sort of rationalize it a little bit ; one that shows it in what we consider a conventional game -- i think everything is a game , but this is sort of more of a what you would think is a game played on a board or on a computer screen , and then one how this can be used for good , so we can see that these forces can really be very powerful .
so the first one -- the most famous appointment dynamic in the world -- is something called happy hour .
so i just recently dropped out of princeton and actually ended up for the first time in a bar , and i saw these happy hour things all over the place , right .
and this is simply an appointment dynamic .
come here at a certain time , get your drinks half off .
to win , all you have to do is show up at the right place at the right time .
this game dynamic is so powerful that it does n't just influence our behavior , it 's influenced our entire culture .
that 's a really scary thought , that one game dynamic can change things so powerfully .
it also exists in more conventional game forms .
i 'm sure you 've all heard of farmville by now .
if you have n't , i recommend playing it .
you wo n't do anything else with the rest of your day .
farmville has more active users than twitter .
it 's incredibly powerful , and it has this dynamic where you have to return at a certain time to water your crops -- fake crops -- or they wilt .
and this is so powerful that , when they tweak their stats , when they say your crops wilt after eight hours , or after six hours , or after 24 hours , it changes the lifecycle of 70 million - some people during the day .
they will return like clockwork at different times .
so if they wanted the world to end , if they wanted productivity to stop , they could make this a 30 - minute cycle , and no one could do anything else , right ?
that 's a little scary .
but this could also be used for good .
this is a local company called vitality , and they 've created a product to help people take their medicine on time .
that 's an appointment .
it 's something that people do n't do very well .
and they have these glowcaps , which , you know , flash and email you and do all sorts of cool things to remind you to take your medicine .
this is one that is n't a game yet , but really should be .
you should get points for doing this on time .
you should lose points for not doing this on time .
they should consciously recognize that they 've built an appointment dynamic and leverage the games .
and then you can really achieve good in some interesting ways .
we 're going to jump onto the next one , maybe . yes .
influence and status .
so this is one of the most famous game dynamics .
it 's used all over the place .
it 's used in your wallets , right now .
we all want that credit card on the far left because it 's black .
and you see someone at cvs or -- not cvs -- at christian dior or something , and then ... i do n't know . i do n't have a black card ; i 've got a debit card .
so they whip it out . and you see men , they have that black card .
i want that because that means that they 're cooler than i am , and i need that .
and this is used in games as well .
" modern warfare , " one of the most successful selling games of all time .
i 'm only a level four , but i desperately want to be a level 10 , because they 've got that cool red badge thing , and that means that i am somehow better than everyone else .
and that 's very powerful to me . status is really good motivator .
it 's also used in more conventional settings and can be used more consciously in conventional settings .
school -- and remember , i made it through one year , so i think i 'm qualified to talk on school -- is a game , it 's just not a terribly well - designed game , right .
there are levels . there are c. there are b. there is a.
there are statuses . i mean , what is valedictorian , but a status ?
if we called valedictorian a " white knight paladin level 20 , " i think people would probably work a lot harder .
so school is a game , and there have been lots of experimentations on how we do this properly .
but let 's use it consciously . like why have games that you can lose ?
why go from an a to an f or a b to a c ?
that sucks . why not level - up ?
and at princeton , they 've actually experimented with this , where they have quizzes where you gain experience points , and you level up from b to an a.
and it 's very powerful .
it can be used in interesting ways .
the third one i want to talk about quickly is the progression dynamic , where you have to sort of make progress , you have to move through different steps in a very granular fashion .
this is used all over the place , including linkedin , where i am an un - whole individual .
i am only 85 percent complete on linkedin , and that bothers me .
and this is so deep - seated in our psyche that when we 're presented with a progress bar and presented with easy , granular steps to take to try and complete that progress bar , we will do it .
we will find a way to move that blue line
all the way to the right edge of the screen .
this is used in conventional games as well .
i mean , you see this is a paladin level 10 , and that 's a paladin level 20 , and if you were going to fight , you know , orcs on the fields of mordor against the raz al ghul , you 'd probably want to be the bigger one , right .
i would .
and so people work very hard to level - up .
" world of warcraft " is one of the most successful games of all time .
the average player spends something like six , six - and - a - half hours a day on it .
their most dedicated players , it 's like a full - time job .
it 's insane . and they have these systems where you can level - up .
and that 's a very powerful thing . progression is powerful .
it can also be used in very compelling ways for good .
one of the things that we work on at scvngr is how do you use games to drive traffic and drive business to local businesses , to sort of something that is very key to the economy .
and here we have a game that people play .
they go places , they do challenges , they earn points .
and we 've introduced a progression dynamic into it , where , by going to the same place over and over , by doing challenges , by engaging with the business , you move a green bar from the left edge of the screen to the right edge of the screen , and you eventually unlock rewards .
and this is powerful enough that we can see that it hooks people into these dynamics , pulls them back to the same local businesses , creates huge loyalty , creates engagement , and is able to drive meaningful revenue and fun and engagement to businesses .
these progression dynamics are powerful and can be used in the real world .
the final one i want to talk about -- and it 's a great one to end on -- is this concept of communal discovery , a dynamic in which everyone has to work together to achieve something .
and communal discovery is powerful because it leverages the network that is society to solve problems .
this is used in some sort of famous consumer web stories , like digg , which i 'm sure you 've all heard of .
digg is a communal dynamic to try to find and source the best news , the most interesting stories .
and they made this into a game , initially .
they had a leader board , where , if you recommended the best stories , you would get points .
and that really motivated people to find the best stories .
but it became so powerful that there was actually a cabal , a group of people , the top seven on the leader board , who would work together to make sure they maintained that position .
and they would recommend other people 's stories ,
and the game became more powerful than the goal .
and they actually had to end up shutting down the leader board because while it was effective , it was so powerful that it stopped sourcing the best stories and started having people work to maintain their leadership .
so we have to use this one carefully .
it 's also used in things like mcdonald 's monopoly , where the game is not the monopoly game you 're playing , but the sort of cottage industries that form to try and find boardwalk , right .
and now they 're just looking for a little sticker that says " boardwalk . "
but it can also be used to find real things .
this is the darpa balloon challenge , where they hid a couple balloons all across the united states and said , " use networks .
try and find these balloons fastest , and the winner will get $ 40,000 . "
and the winner was actually a group out of mit , where they created sort of a pyramid scheme , a network , where the first person to recommend the location of a balloon got $ 2,000 and anyone else to push that recommendation up also got a cut of it .
and in 12 hours , they were able to find all these balloons , all across the country , right .
really powerful dynamic .
and so , i 've got about 20 seconds left , so if i 'm going to leave you with anything , last decade was the decade of social .
this next decade is the decade of games .
we use game dynamics to build on it . we build with mindshare .
we can influence behavior .
it is very powerful . it is very exciting .
let 's all build it together , let 's do it well and have fun playing .
