you will understand nothing with my type of english .
it 's good for you because you can have a break after all these fantastic people .
i must tell you i am like that , not very comfortable , because usually , in life , i think my job is absolutely useless .
i mean , i feel useless .
now after carolyn , and all the other guys , i feel like shit .
and definitively , i do n't know why i am here , but -- you know the nightmare you can have , like you are an impostor , you arrive at the opera , and they push you , " you must sing ! "
i do n't know .
so , so , because i have nothing to show , nothing to say , we shall try to speak about something else .
we can start , if you want , by understanding -- it 's just to start , it 's not interesting , but -- how i work .
when somebody comes to me and ask for what i am known , i mean , yes , lemon squeezer , toilet brush , toothpick , beautiful toilet seats , and why not -- a toothbrush ?
i do n't try to design the toothbrush .
i do n't try to say , " oh , that will be a beautiful object , " or something like that .
that does n't interest me .
because there is different types of design .
the one , we can call it the cynical design , that means the design invented by raymond loewy in the '50s , who said , what is ugly is a bad sale , la laideur se vend mal , which is terrible .
it means the design must be just the weapon for marketing , for producer to make product more sexy , like that , they sell more : it 's shit , it 's obsolete , it 's ridiculous .
i call that the cynical design .
after , there is the narcissistic design : it 's a fantastic designer who designs only for other fantastic designers .
after , there is people like me , who try to deserve to exist , and who are so ashamed to make this useless job , who try to do it in another way , and they try , i try , to not make the object for the object but for the result , for the profit for the human being , the person who will use it .
if we take the toothbrush -- i do n't think about the toothbrush .
i think , " what will be the effect of the brush in the mouth ? "
and to understand what will be the effect of the toothbrush in the mouth , i must imagine : who owns this mouth ?
what is the life of the owner of this mouth ? in what society [ does ] this guy live ?
what civilization creates this society ?
what animal species creates this civilization ?
when i arrive -- and i take one minute , i am not so intelligent -- when i arrive at the level of animal species , that becomes real interesting .
me , i have strictly no power to change anything .
but when i come back , i can understand why i shall not do it , because today to not do it , it 's more positive than do it , or how i shall do it .
but to come back , where i am at the animal species , there is things to see .
there is things to see , there is the big challenge .
the big challenge in front of us .
because there is not a human production which exists outside of what i call " the big image . "
the big image is our story , our poetry , our romanticism .
our poetry is our mutation , our life .
we must remember , and we can see that in any book of my son of 10 years old , that life appears four billion years ago , around -- four billion point two ?
voice offstage : four point five .
yes , point five , ok , ok , ok ! i 'm a designer , that 's all , of christmas gifts .
and before , there was this soup , called " soupe primordiale , " this first soup -- bloop bloop bloop -- sort of dirty mud , no life , nothing .
so then -- pshoo - shoo -- lightning -- pshoo -- arrive -- pshoo - shoo -- makes life -- bloop bloop -- and that dies .
some million years after -- pshoo - shoo , bloop - bloop -- ah , wake up !
at the end , finally , that succeeds , and life appears .
we was so , so stupid . the most stupid bacteria .
even , i think , we copy our way to reproduce , you know what i mean , and something of -- oh no , forget it .
after , we become a fish ; after , we become a frog ; after , we become a monkey ; after , we become what we are today : a super - monkey , and the fun is , the super - monkey we are today , is at half of the story .
can you imagine ? from that stupid bacteria to us , with a microphone , with a computer , with an ipod : four billion years .
and we know , and especially carolyn knows , that when the sun will implode , the earth will burn , explode , i do n't know what , and this is scheduled for four , four billion years ?
yes , she said , something like that . ok , that means we are at half of the story .
fantastic ! it 's a beauty !
can you imagine ? it 's very symbolic .
because the bacteria we was had no idea of what we are today .
and today , we have no idea of what we shall be in four billion years .
and this territory is fantastic .
that is our poetry . that is our beautiful story .
it 's our romanticism . mu - ta - tion . we are mutants .
and if we do n't deeply understand , if we do n't integrate that we are mutants , we completely miss the story .
because every generation thinks we are the final one .
we have a way to look at earth like that , you know , " i am the man . the final man .
you know , we mutate during four billion years before , but now , because it 's me , we stop . fin .
for the end , for the eternity , it is one with a red jacket . "
something like that . i am not sure of that .
because that is our intelligence of mutation and things like that .
there is so many things to do ; it 's so fresh .
and here is something : nobody is obliged to be a genius , but everybody is obliged to participate .
and to participate , for a mutant , there is a minimum of exercise , a minimum of sport .
we can say that .
the first , if you want -- there is so many -- but one which is very easy to do , is the duty of vision .
i can explain you . i shall try .
if you walk like that , it 's ok , it 's ok , you can walk , but perhaps , because you walk with the eyes like that , you will not see , oh , there is a hole .
and you will fall , and you will die . dangerous .
that 's why , perhaps , you will try to have this angle of vision .
ok , i can see , if i found something , up , up , and they continue , up up up .
i raise the angle of vision , but it 's still very -- selfish , selfish , egoiste -- yes , selfish .
you , you survive . it 's ok .
if you raise the level of your eyes a little more you go , " i see you , oh my god you are here , how are you , i can help you , i can design for you a new toothbrush , new toilet brush , " something like that .
i live in society ; i live in community .
it 's ok . you start to be in the territory of intelligence , we can say .
from this level , the more you can raise this angle of view , the more you will be important for the society .
the more you will rise , the more you will be important for the civilization .
the more you will rise , to see far and high , like that , the more you will be important for the story of our mutation .
that means intelligent people are in this angle . that is intelligence .
from this to here , that , it 's genius .
ptolemy , eratosthenes , einstein , things like that .
nobody 's obliged to be a genius .
it 's better , but nobody .
take care , in this training , to be a good mutant .
there is some danger , there is some trap . one trap : the vertical .
because at the vertical of us , if you look like that , " ah ! my god , there is god . ah ! god ! "
god is a trap . god is the answer when we do n't know the answer .
that means , when your brain is not enough big , when you do n't understand , you go , " ah , it 's god , it 's god . " that 's ridiculous .
that 's why -- jump , like that ? no , do n't jump .
come back . because , after , there is another trap .
if you look like that , you look to the past , or you look inside if you are very flexible , inside yourself .
it 's called schizophrenia , and you are dead also .
that 's why every morning , now , because you are a good mutant , you will raise your angle of view .
out , more of the horizontal . you are an intelligence .
never forget -- like that , like that .
it 's very , very , very important .
what , what else we can say about that ? why do that ?
it 's because we -- if we look from far , we see our line of evolution .
this line of evolution is clearly positive .
from far , this line looks very smooth , like that .
but if you take a lens , like that , this line is ack , ack , ack , ack , ack . like that .
it 's made of light and shadow .
we can say light is civilization , shadow is barbaria .
and it 's very important to know where we are .
because some cycle , there is a spot in the cycle , and you have not the same duty in the different parts of the cycle .
that means , we can imagine -- i do n't say it was fantastic , but in the '80s , there was not too much war , like that , it was -- we can imagine that the civilization can become civilized .
in this case , people like me are acceptable .
we can say , " it 's luxurious time . "
we have time to think , we have time to i do n't know what , speak about art and things like that .
it 's ok . we are in the light .
but sometimes , like today , we fall , we fall so fast , so fast to shadow , we fall so fast to barbaria .
with many , many , many , many face of barbaria .
because it 's not , the barbaria we have today , it 's perhaps not the barbaria we think .
there is different type of barbaria .
that 's why we must adapt .
that means , when barbaria is back , forget the beautiful chairs , forget the beautiful hotel , forget design , even -- i 'm sorry to say -- forget art .
forget all that . there is priority ; there is urgency .
you must go back to politics , you must go back to radicalization , i 'm sorry if that 's not very english .
you must go back to fight , to battle .
that 's why today i 'm so ashamed to make this job .
that 's why i am here , to try to do it the best possible .
but i know that even i do it the best possible -- that 's why i 'm the best -- it 's nothing .
because it 's not the right time .
that 's why i say that . i say that , because , i repeat , nothing exist if it 's not in the good reason , the reason of our beautiful dream , of this civilization .
and because we must all work to finish this story .
because the scenario of this civilization -- about love , progress , and things like that -- it 's ok , but there is so many different , other scenarios of other civilizations .
this scenario , of this civilization , was about becoming powerful , intelligent , like this idea we have invented , this concept of god .
we are god now . we are . it 's almost done .
we have just to finish the story .
that is very , very important .
and when you do n't understand really what 's happened , you cannot go and fight and work and build and things like that .
you go to the future back , back , back , back , like that .
and you can fall , and it 's very dangerous .
no , you must really understand that .
because we have almost finished , i 'll repeat this story .
and the beauty of this , in perhaps 50 years , 60 years , we can finish completely this civilization , and offer to our children the possibility to invent a new story , a new poetry , a new romanticism .
with billions of people who have been born , worked , lived and died before us , these people who have worked so much , we have now bring beautiful things , beautiful gifts , we know so many things .
we can say to our children , ok , done , that was our story . that passed .
now you have a duty : invent a new story . invent a new poetry .
the only rule is , we have not to have any idea about the next story .
we give you white pages . invent .
we give you the best tools , the best tools , and now , do it .
that 's why i continue to work , even if it 's for toilet brush .
