i 'm just going to play a brief video clip .
video : on the fifth of december 1985 , a bottle of 1787 lafitte was sold for 105,000 pounds -- nine times the previous world record .
the buyer was kip forbes , son of one of the most flamboyant millionaires of the 20th century .
the original owner of the bottle turned out to be one of the most enthusiastic wine buffs of the 18th century .
château lafitte is one of the greatest wines in the world , the prince of any wine cellar .
benjamin wallace : now , that 's about all the videotape that remains of an event that set off the longest - running mystery in the modern wine world .
and the mystery existed because of a gentleman named hardy rodenstock .
in 1985 , he announced to his friends in the wine world that he had made this incredible discovery .
some workmen in paris had broken through a brick wall , and happened upon this hidden cache of wines -- apparently the property of thomas jefferson . 1787 , 1784 .
he would n't reveal the exact number of bottles , he would not reveal exactly where the building was and he would not reveal exactly who owned the building .
the mystery persisted for about 20 years .
it finally began to get resolved in 2005 because of this guy .
bill koch is a florida billionaire who owns four of the jefferson bottles , and he became suspicious .
and he ended up spending over a million dollars and hiring ex - fbi and ex - scotland yard agents to try to get to the bottom of this .
there 's now ample evidence that hardy rodenstock is a con man , and that the jefferson bottles were fakes .
but for those 20 years , an unbelievable number of really eminent and accomplished figures in the wine world were sort of drawn into the orbit of these bottles .
i think they wanted to believe that the most expensive bottle of wine in the world must be the best bottle of wine in the world , must be the rarest bottle of wine in the world .
i became increasingly , kind of voyeuristically interested in the question of you know , why do people spend these crazy amounts of money , not only on wine but on lots of things , and are they living a better life than me ?
so , i decided to embark on a quest .
with the generous backing of a magazine i write for sometimes , i decided to sample the very best , or most expensive , or most coveted item in about a dozen categories , which was a very grueling quest , as you can imagine .
this was the first one .
a lot of the kobe beef that you see in the u.s. is not the real thing .
it may come from wagyu cattle , but it 's not from the original , appalachian hyogo prefecture in japan .
there are very few places in the u.s. where you can try real kobe , and one of them is wolfgang puck 's restaurant , cut , in los angeles .
i went there , and i ordered the eight - ounce rib eye for 160 dollars .
and it arrived , and it was tiny .
and i was outraged .
it was like , 160 dollars for this ?
and then i took a bite , and i wished that it was tinier , because kobe beef is so rich .
it 's like foie gras -- it 's not even like steak .
i almost could n't finish it .
i was really happy when i was done .
now , the photographer who took the pictures for this project for some reason posed his dog in a lot of them , so that 's why you 're going to see this recurring character .
which , i guess , you know , communicates to you that i did not think that one was really worth the price .
white truffles .
one of the most expensive luxury foods by weight in the world .
to try this , i went to a mario batali restaurant in manhattan -- del posto .
the waiter , you know , came out with the white truffle knob and his shaver , and he shaved it onto my pasta and he said , you know , " would signore like the truffles ? "
and the charm of white truffles is in their aroma .
it 's not in their taste , really . it 's not in their texture .
it 's in the smell .
these white pearlescent flakes hit the noodles , this haunting , wonderful , nutty , mushroomy smell wafted up .
10 seconds passed and it was gone .
and then i was left with these little ugly flakes on my pasta that , you know , their purpose had been served , and so i 'm afraid to say that this was also a disappointment to me .
there were several -- several of these items were disappointments .
yeah .
the magazine would n't pay for me to go there .
they did give me a tour , though .
and this hotel suite is 4,300 square feet .
it has 360 - degree views .
it has four balconies .
it was designed by the architect i.m. pei .
it comes with its own rolls royce and driver .
it comes with its own wine cellar that you can draw freely from .
when i took the tour , it actually included some opus one , i was glad to see .
30,000 dollars for a night in a hotel .
this is soap that 's made from silver nanoparticles , which have antibacterial properties .
i washed my face with this this morning in preparation for this .
and it , you know , tickled a little bit and it smelled good , but i have to say that nobody here has complimented me on the cleanliness of my face today .
but then again , nobody has complimented me on the jeans i 'm wearing .
these ones gq did spring for -- i own these -- but i will tell you , not only did i not get a compliment from any of you , i have not gotten a compliment from anybody in the months that i have owned and worn these .
i do n't think that whether or not you 're getting a compliment should be the test of something 's value , but i think in the case of a fashion item , an article of clothing , that 's a reasonable benchmark .
that said , a lot of work goes into these .
they are made from handpicked organic zimbabwean cotton that has been shuttle loomed and then hand - dipped in natural indigo 24 times .
but no compliments .
thank you .
armando manni is a former filmmaker who makes this olive oil from an olive that grows on a single slope in tuscany .
and he goes to great lengths to protect the olive oil from oxygen and light .
he uses tiny bottles , the glass is tinted , he tops the olive oil off with an inert gas .
and he actually -- once he releases a batch of it , he regularly conducts molecular analyses and posts the results online , so you can go online and look at your batch number and see how the phenolics are developing , and , you know , gauge its freshness .
i did a blind taste test of this with 20 people and five other olive oils .
it tasted fine . it tasted interesting .
it was very green , it was very peppery .
but in the blind taste test , it came in last .
the olive oil that came in first was actually a bottle of whole foods 365 olive oil which had been oxidizing next to my stove for six months .
a recurring theme is that a lot of these things are from japan -- you 'll start to notice .
i do n't play golf , so i could n't actually road test these , but i did interview a guy who owns them .
even the people who market these clubs -- i mean , they 'll say these have four axis shafts which minimize loss of club speed and thereby drive the ball farther -- but they 'll say , look , you know , you 're not getting 57,000 dollars worth of performance from these clubs .
you 're paying for the bling , that they 're encrusted with gold and platinum .
the guy who i interviewed who owns them did say that he 's gotten a lot of pleasure out of them , so ...
oh , yeah , you know this one ?
this is a coffee made from a very unusual process .
the luwak is an asian palm civet .
it 's a cat that lives in trees , and at night it comes down and it prowls the coffee plantations .
and apparently it 's a very picky eater and it , you know , hones in on only the ripest coffee cherries .
and then an enzyme in its digestive tract leeches into the beans , and people with the unenviable job of collecting these cats ' leavings then go through the forest collecting the , you know , results and processing it into coffee -- although you actually can buy it that 's right .
japan is doing crazy things with toilets .
there is now a toilet that has an mp 3 player in it .
there 's one with a fragrance dispenser .
there 's one that actually analyzes the contents of the bowl and transmits the results via email to your doctor .
it 's almost like a home medical center -- and that is the direction that japanese toilet technology is heading in .
this one does not have those bells and whistles , but for pure functionality it 's pretty much the best -- the neorest 600 .
and to try this -- i could n't get a loaner , but i did go into the manhattan showroom of the manufacturer , toto , and they have a bathroom off of the showroom that you can use , which i used .
it 's fully automated -- you walk towards it , and the seat lifts .
the seat is preheated .
there 's a water jet that cleans you .
there 's an air jet that dries you .
you get up , it flushes by itself .
the lid closes , it self - cleans .
not only is it a technological leap forward , but i really do believe it 's a bit of a cultural leap forward .
i mean , a no hands , no toilet paper toilet .
and i want to get one of these .
this was another one i could not get a loaner of .
tom cruise supposedly owns this bed .
there 's a little plaque on the end that , you know , each buyer gets their name engraved on it .
to try this one , the maker of it let me and my wife spend the night in the manhattan showroom .
lights glaring in off the street , and we had to hire a security guard and all these things .
but anyway , we had a great night 's sleep .
and you spend a third of your life in bed .
i do n't think it 's that bad of a deal .
this was a fun one .
this is the fastest street - legal car in the world and the most expensive production car .
i got to drive this with a chaperone from the company , a professional race car driver , and we drove around the canyons outside of los angeles and down on the pacific coast highway .
and , you know , when we pulled up to a stoplight the people in the adjacent cars kind of gave us respectful nods .
and it was really amazing .
it was such a smooth ride .
most of the cars that i drive , if i get up to 80 they start to rattle .
i switched lanes on the highway and the driver , this chaperone , said , " you know , you were just going 110 miles an hour . "
and i had no idea that i was one of those obnoxious people you occasionally see weaving in and out of traffic , because it was just that smooth .
and if i was a billionaire , i would get one .
this is a completely gratuitous video i 'm just going to show of one of the pitfalls of advanced technology .
this is tom cruise arriving at the " mission : impossible iii " premiere .
when he tries to open the door , you could call it " mission : impossible iv . "
there was one object that i could not get my hands on , and that was the 1947 cheval blanc .
the '47 cheval blanc is probably the most mythologized wine of the 20th century .
and cheval blanc is kind of an unusual wine for bordeaux in having a significant percentage of the cabernet franc grape .
and 1947 was a legendary vintage , especially in the right bank of bordeaux .
and just together , that vintage and that chateau took on this aura that eventually kind of gave it this cultish following .
but it 's 60 years old .
there 's not much of it left .
what there is of it left you do n't know if it 's real -- it 's considered to be the most faked wine in the world .
not that many people are looking to pop open their one remaining bottle for a journalist .
so , i 'd about given up trying to get my hands on one of these .
i 'd put out feelers to retailers , to auctioneers , and it was coming up empty .
and then i got an email from a guy named bipin desai .
bipin desai is a u.c. riverside theoretical physicist who also happens to be the preeminent organizer of rare wine tastings , and he said , " i 've got a tasting coming up where we 're going to serve the '47 cheval blanc . "
and it was going to be a double vertical -- it was going to be 30 vintages of cheval blanc , and 30 vintages of yquem .
and it was an invitation you do not refuse .
i went .
it was three days , four meals .
and at lunch on saturday , we opened the '47 .
and you know , it had this fragrant softness , and it smelled a little bit of linseed oil .
and then i tasted it , and it , you know , had this kind of unctuous , porty richness , which is characteristic of that wine -- that it sort of resembles port in a lot of ways .
there were people at my table who thought it was , you know , fantastic .
there were some people who were a little less impressed .
and i was n't that impressed .
and i do n't -- call my palate a philistine palate -- so it does n't necessarily mean something that i was n't impressed , but i was not the only one there who had that reaction .
and it was n't just to that wine .
any one of the wines served at this tasting , if i 'd been served it at a dinner party , it would have been , you know , the wine experience of my lifetime , and incredibly memorable .
but drinking 60 great wines over three days , they all just blurred together , and it became almost a grueling experience .
and i just wanted to finish by mentioning a very interesting study which came out earlier this year from some researchers at stanford and caltech .
and they gave subjects the same wine , labeled with different price tags .
a lot of people , you know , said that they liked the more expensive wine more -- it was the same wine , but they thought it was a different one that was more expensive .
but what was unexpected was that these researchers did mri brain imaging while the people were drinking the wine , and not only did they say they enjoyed the more expensively labeled wine more -- their brain actually registered as experiencing more pleasure from the same wine when it was labeled with a higher price tag .
thank you .
