charles and ray were a team . they were husband and wife .
despite the new york times ' and vanity fair 's best efforts recently , they 're not brothers .
and they were a lot of fun .
you know , ray was the one who wore the ampersands in the family .
we are going to focus on charles today , because it is charles ' 100th birthday .
but when i speak of him , i 'm really speaking of both of them as a team .
here 's charles when he was three . so he would be 100 this june .
we have a lot of cool celebrations that we 're going to do .
the thing about their work is that most people come to the door of furniture -- i suspect you probably recognize this chair and some of the others i 'm going to show you .
but we 're going to first enter through the door of the big top .
the whole thing about this , though , is that , you know , why am i showing it ?
is it because charles and ray made this film ?
this is actually a training film for a clown college that they had .
they also practiced a clown act when the future of furniture was not nearly as auspicious as it turned out to be .
there is a picture of charles . so let 's watch the next clip .
the film that we 're about to see is a film they made for the moscow world 's fair .
video : this is the land .
it has many contrasts .
it is rough and it is flat .
in places it is cold .
in some it is hot .
too much rain falls on some areas , and not enough on others .
but people live on this land .
and , as in russia , they are drawn together into towns and cities .
here is something of the way they live .
eames demetrios : now , this is a film that was hardly ever seen in the united states .
it was on seven screens and it was 200 feet across .
and it was at the height of the cold war .
the nixon - khrushchev kitchen debate happened about 50 feet from where this was shown .
and yet , how did it start ?
you know , commonality , the first line in charles ' narration was , " the same stars that shine down on russia shine down on the united states . from the sky , our cities look much the same . "
it was that human connection that charles and ray always found in everything .
and you can imagine , and the thing about it is , that they believed that the human mind could handle this number of images because the important thing was to get the gestalt of what the images were about .
so that was just a little snip .
but the thing about charles and ray is that they were always modeling stuff .
they were always trying things out .
i think one of the things i am passionate about , my grandparents work , i 'm passionate about my work , but on top of all that i 'm passionate about a holistic vision of design , where design is a life skill , not a professional skill .
and you know , those of us with kids often want our kids to take music .
i 'm no exception .
but it 's not about them becoming bono or tracy chapman .
it 's about getting that music thing going through their heads and their thinking .
design is the same way . design has to become that same way .
and this is a model that they did of that seven - screen presentation .
and charles just checking it out there .
so now we 're going to go through that door of furniture .
this is an unusual installation of airport seating .
so what we 're going to see is some of the icons of eames furniture .
and the thing about their furniture is that they said the role of the designer was essentially that of a good host , anticipating the needs of the guest .
so those are cool images . but these are ones i think are really cool .
these are all the prototypes . these are the mistakes , although i do n't think mistakes is the right word in design .
it 's just the things you try out to kind of make it work better .
and you know some of them would probably be terrible chairs .
some of them are kind of cool looking . it 's like " hey , why did n't they try that ? "
it was that hands - on iterative process which is so much like vernacular design and folk design in traditional cultures .
and i think that 's one of the commonalities between modernism and traditional design . i think it may be a real common ground as we kind of figure out what on earth to do in the next 20 or 30 years .
the other thing that 's kind of cool is that you look at this and in the media when people say design , they actually mean style .
and i 'm really here to talk about design .
but you know the object is just a pivot .
it 's a pivot between a process and a system .
and this is a little film i made about the making of the eames lounge chair .
the design process for charles and ray never ended in manufacturing .
it continued . they were always trying to make thing better and better .
because it 's like as bill clinton was saying about rwandan health clinics .
it 's not enough to create one .
you 've got to create a system that will work better and better .
so i 've always liked this prototype picture .
because it just kind of , you know , does n't get any more basic than that .
you try things out .
this is a relatively famous chair .
its early version had an " x " base . that 's what the collectors like .
charles and ray liked this one because it was better .
it worked better : " h " base , much more practical .
this is something called a splint .
and i was very touched by dean kamen 's work for the military , or for the soldiers , because charles and ray designed a molded plywood splint . this is it .
and they 'd been working on furniture before .
but doing these splints they learned a lot about the manufacturing process , which was incredibly important to them .
i 'm trying to show you too much , because i want you to really get a broth of ideas and images .
this is a house that charles and ray designed .
my sister is chasing someone else . it 's not me .
although i endorse heartily the fact that he stole her diary , it 's not me .
and then this is a film , on the lower left , that charles and ray made .
now look at that plastic chair .
the house is 1949 .
the chair is done in 1949 .
charles and ray , they did n't obsess about style for it 's own sake .
they did n't say , " our style is curves . let 's make the house curvy . "
they did n't say , " our style is grids . let 's make the chair griddy . "
they focused on the need .
they tried to solve the design problem .
charles used to say , " the extent to which you have a design style is the extent to which you have not solved the design problem . "
it 's kind of a brutal quote .
this is the earlier design of that house .
and again , they managed to figure out a way to make a prototype of a house -- architecture , very expensive medium .
here 's a film we 've been hearing things about .
the " powers of ten " is a film they made .
if we watch the next clip , you 're going to see the first version of " powers of ten , " upper left .
the familiar one on the lower right .
the eames ' film tops , lower left .
and a lamp that charles designed for a church .
video : which in turn belongs to a local group of galaxies .
these form part of a grouping system much as the stars do .
they are so many and so varied that from this distance they appear like the stars from earth .
ed : you 've seen that film , and what 's so great about this whole conference is that everybody has been talking about scale .
everybody here is coming at it from a different way .
i want to give you one example .
e.o. wilson once told me that when he looked at ants -- he loved them , of course , and he wanted to learn more about them -- he consciously looked at them from the standpoint of scale .
so here is the tiny creature .
and yet simply by changing the frame of reference it reveals so much , including what ended up being the ted prize .
modeling , they tried modeling all the time . they were always modeling things .
and i think part of that is that they never delegated understanding .
and i think in our family we were very lucky , because we learned about design backwards .
design was not something other .
it was part of the business of life in general .
it was part of the quality of life .
and here is some family pictures .
and you can see why i 'm down on style , with a haircut like that .
but anyway , i remember the cut grapefruit that we would have at the eames house when i was a kid .
so we 're going to watch another film .
this is a film , the one called toys .
you can see me , i have the same haircut , in the upper right corner .
upper left is a film they did on toy trains .
lower right is a solar do - nothing toy .
lower left is day - of - the - dead toys .
charles used to say that toys are not as innocent as they appear .
they are often the precursor to bigger things .
and these ideas -- that train up there , being about the honest use of materials , is totally the same as the honest use of materials in the plywood .
and now i 'm going to test you .
this is a letter that my grandfather sent to my mom when she was five years old .
so can you read it ?
lucia angel , okay , eye .
audience : saw many trains .
ed : awl , also , good that the leather crafter 's guild is here .
also , what is he doing ? row , rowed .
sun ? no. well is there another name for a sunrise ?
dawn , very good .
also rode on one . i ...
audience : you had , i hope you had -- ed : now you 've been to the website dogs of saint louis in the late , in the mid - 1930 's , then you 'd know that was a great dane .
so , i hope you had a audience : nice time , time -- ed : time at .
citizen kane , rose -- audience : rosebud .
ed : no , bud . " d " 's right . at buddy 's -- audience : party . love .
ed : okay , good .
so , " i saw many trains and also rode on one .
i hope you had a nice time at buddy 's party . "
so you guys did pretty good , cool .
so my mom and charles had this great relationship where they 'd send those sorts of things back and forth to one another .
and it 's all part of the , you know , they used to say , " take your pleasure seriously . "
these are some images from a project of mine that 's called kymaerica .
it 's sort of an alternative universe .
it 's kind of a reinterpretation of the landscape .
those plaques are plaques we 've been installing around north america .
we 're about to do six in the u.k. next week .
and they honor events in the linear world from the fictional world .
so , of course , since it 's bronze it has to be true .
video : kymaerica with waterfalls , tumbling through our -- ed : this is one of the traditional kymaerican songs .
and so we had spelling bees in paris , illinois .
video : your word is n. carolina .
girl : y - i - n - d - i - a - n - a.
ed : and then embassy row is actually a historical site , because in the kymaerican story this is where the parisian diaspora started , where there embassy was .
so you can actually visit and have this three - dimensional fictional experience there .
and the town has really embraced it .
we had the spelling bee in conjunction with the gwomeus club .
but what is really cool is that we take our visual environment as inevitable . and it 's not .
other things could have happened . the japanese could have discovered monterey .
and we could have been born 100,000 years ago .
and there are a lot of fun things . this is the museum of the bench .
they have trading cards and all sorts of cool things .
and you 're kind of trapped in the texture of kymaerica .
the tahatchabe , the great road building culture .
a guy named nobu naga , the so - called japanese columbus .
but now i 'm going to return you to the real world .
and this is cranbrook . i 've got a real treat for you , which is the first film that charles ever made .
so let 's watch that . nobody 's ever seen it .
cranbrook is very generous to let us show it for the first time here .
it 's a film about maya gretel , a famous ceramicist , and a teacher at cranbrook .
and he made it for the 1939 faculty exhibition .
silent . we do n't have a track for it yet .
very simple . it 's just a start . but it 's that learn - by - doing thing .
you want to learn how to make films ? go make a movie .
and you try something out .
but here is what 's really great .
see that chair there ? the orange one ? that 's the organic chair . 1940 .
at the same time that charles was doing that chair , he was doing this film .
so my point is that this scope of vision , this holistic vision of design , was with them from the beginning .
it was n't like " oh , we made some chairs and got successful .
now we 're going to do some movies . "
it was always part of how they looked at the world . and that 's what 's really powerful .
and i think that all of us in this room , as you move design forward , it 's not about just doing one thing .
it 's about how you approach problems . and there is this huge , beautiful commonality between design , business and the world .
so we 're going to do the last clip .
and i 've shown you some of the images . i just want to focus on sound now .
so this is charles ' voice .
charles eames : in india , those without , and the lowest in caste , eat very often , particularly in southern india , they eat off of a banana leaf .
and those a little bit up the scale eat off of a sort of a low - fired ceramic dish .
and a little bit higher , why they have a glaze on a thing they call a thali .
if you 're up the scale a little bit more , why , a brass thali .
and then things get to be a little questionable .
there are things like silver - plated thalis .
and there is solid silver thalis .
and i suppose some nut has had a gold thali that he 's eaten off of .
but you can go beyond that .
and the guys that have not only means , but a certain amount of knowledge and understanding , go to the next step , and they eat off a banana leaf .
and i think that in these times when we fall back and regroup , that somehow or other , the banana leaf parable sort of got to get working there , because i 'm not prepared to say that the banana leaf that one eats off of is the same as the other eats off of .
but it is that process that has happened within the man that changes the banana leaf .
ed : i 've been looking forward to sharing that quote with you .
because that 's part of where we 've got to get to .
and i also want to share this one .
" beyond the age of information is the age of choices . "
and i really think that 's where we are .
and it 's kind of cool for me to be part of a family and a tradition where he was talking about that in 1978 .
and part of why this stuff is important and all the things that we do are important , is that these are the ideas we need .
and i think that this is all part of surrendering to the design journey .
that 's what we all need to do .
design is not just for designers anymore . it 's a process . it 's not style .
all that great thinking needs to really get about solving pretty key problems .
i really thank you for your time .
