so , these are the dark ages .
and the dark ages are the time between when you put away the lego for the last time as a kid , and you decide as an adult that it is okay to play with a kid 's toy .
started out with my then four - year - old : " oh , should buy the kid some lego .
that stuff 's cool . "
walked into the lego store .
bought him this .
it 's totally appropriate for a four - year - old .
i think the box says -- let 's see here -- " 8 to 12 " on it .
i turn to my wife and said , " who are we buying this for ? "
she 's like , " oh , us . " i 'm like , " okay . all right . that 's cool . "
pretty soon it got a little bit out of control .
the dining room looked like this .
you walk there , and it hurts .
so we took a room downstairs in the basement that had been used as sort of an abu ghraib annex .
torture , very funny .
wow , you guys are great .
and we put down those little floor tiles , and then i went onto ebay and bought 150 pounds of lego -- which is insane .
my daughter -- the day we got it , i was tucking her in -- and i said , " honey , you 're my treasure . "
and she said , " no , the lego is the treasure . "
and then she said , " dad , we 're lego rich . "
i was like , " yeah .
i suppose we are . "
so then once you do that you 're like , " oh , crap . where am i going to put all this ? "
so you go to the container store and spend an enormous amount of money , and then you start this crazy sorting process that never -- it 's just nuts .
whatever .
so then you realize there are these conventions .
and you go to one of these conventions , and some dude built the titanic .
and you 're like , " holy shit !
he had to come in like a truck , a semi , with this thing . "
and then someone built this -- this is the smith tower in seattle .
just beautiful .
and there 's a dude selling these aftermarket weapons for lego , because lego -- the danish -- no , they 're not into guns .
but the americans ? oh , we 'll make some guns for lego , no problem .
and at a certain point , you look around , you 're like , " whoa , this is a really nerdy crowd . "
and i mean like this is a nerdy crowd , but that 's like a couple of levels above furries .
the nerds here , they get laid -- except for the lady with the condoms in her pocket -- and you say to yourself at some point , " am i part of this group ? like , am i into this ? "
and i was just like , " yeah , i guess i am.
i 'm coming out .
i 'm kind of into this stuff , and i 'm going to stop being embarrassed . "
so then you really get into it , and you 're like , " well , the lego people in denmark , they 've got all this software to let you build your own virtually . "
and so this is like this cad program where you build it .
and then whatever you design virtually , you click the button and it shows up at your doorstep a week later .
and then some of the designs that people do they actually sell in the store .
the lego guys do n't give you any royalties , strangely , but some user made this and then it sold .
and it 's pretty amazing actually .
then you notice that if that lego - provided cad program is n't enough , there 's an entire open - source , third - party , independent lego cad program that lets you do 3d modeling and 3d rendering and make , in fact , movies out of lego , 3d films of which there are thousands on youtube , and some of them sort of mimicking famous films and some totally original content -- just beautiful -- and people recreating all sorts of things .
i have to take a moment .
i love the guy who 's like running away with his clasps , his hooks .
okay . anyway .
there 's a whole programming language and robotics tool , so if you want to teach someone how to program , kid , adult , whatever it is .
and the guy that made this , he made a slot machine out of lego .
and i do n't mean he made lego that looked like a slot machine ; i mean he made a slot machine out of lego .
the insides were lego .
there 's people getting drunk building lego , and you 've got to finish the thing before you puke .
there 's a whole gray market for lego , thousands of home - based businesses .
and some people will fund their entire lego habit by selling the little guy , but then you have no guys in your ships .
and then , just some examples . this stuff really is sculpture .
this is amazing what you can do .
and do n't kid yourself : some architectural details , incredible organic shapes and just , even , nature out of , again , little blocks .
this is my house .
and this is my house .
i was afraid a car was going to come smash it as i was taking a picture for you guys .
anyway , i 'm out of time .
but just very quickly -- we 'll just see if i can do this quick .
because there are n't enough ted logos around here .
let 's see here .
okay .
ta - da .
