everyone is both a learner and a teacher .
this is me being inspired by my first tutor , my mom , and this is me teaching introduction to artificial intelligence to 200 students at stanford university .
now the students and i enjoyed the class , but it occurred to me that while the subject matter of the class is advanced and modern , the teaching technology is n't .
in fact , i use basically the same technology as this 14th - century classroom .
note the textbook , the sage on the stage , and the sleeping guy in the back .
just like today .
so my co - teacher , sebastian thrun , and i thought , there must be a better way .
we challenged ourselves to create an online class that would be equal or better in quality to our stanford class , but to bring it to anyone in the world for free .
we announced the class on july 29th , and within two weeks , 50,000 people had signed up for it .
and that grew to 160,000 students from 209 countries .
we were thrilled to have that kind of audience , and just a bit terrified that we had n't finished preparing the class yet .
so we got to work .
we studied what others had done , what we could copy and what we could change .
benjamin bloom had showed that one - on - one tutoring works best , so that 's what we tried to emulate , like with me and my mom , even though we knew it would be one - on - thousands .
here , an overhead video camera is recording me as i 'm talking and drawing on a piece of paper .
a student said , " this class felt like sitting in a bar with a really smart friend who 's explaining something you have n't grasped , but are about to . " and that 's exactly what we were aiming for .
now , from khan academy , we saw that short 10 - minute videos worked much better than trying to record an hour - long lecture and put it on the small - format screen .
we decided to go even shorter and more interactive .
our typical video is two minutes , sometimes shorter , never more than six , and then we pause for a quiz question , to make it feel like one - on - one tutoring .
here , i 'm explaining how a computer uses the grammar of english to parse sentences , and here , there 's a pause and the student has to reflect , understand what 's going on and check the right boxes before they can continue .
students learn best when they 're actively practicing .
we wanted to engage them , to have them grapple with ambiguity and guide them to synthesize the key ideas themselves .
we mostly avoid questions like , " here 's a formula , now tell me the value of y when x is equal to two . " we preferred open - ended questions .
one student wrote , " now i 'm seeing bayes networks and examples of game theory everywhere i look . " and i like that kind of response .
that 's just what we were going for .
we did n't want students to memorize the formulas ; we wanted to change the way they looked at the world .
and we succeeded .
or , i should say , the students succeeded .
and it 's a little bit ironic that we set about to disrupt traditional education , and in doing so , we ended up making our online class much more like a traditional college class than other online classes .
most online classes , the videos are always available .
you can watch them any time you want .
but if you can do it any time , that means you can do it tomorrow , and if you can do it tomorrow , well , you may not ever get around to it .
so we brought back the innovation of having due dates .
you could watch the videos any time you wanted during the week , but at the end of the week , you had to get the homework done .
this motivated the students to keep going , and it also meant that everybody was working on the same thing at the same time , so if you went into a discussion forum , you could get an answer from a peer within minutes .
now , i 'll show you some of the forums , most of which were self - organized by the students themselves .
from daphne koller and andrew ng , we learned the concept of " flipping " the classroom .
students watched the videos on their own , and then they come together to discuss them .
from eric mazur , i learned about peer instruction , that peers can be the best teachers , because they 're the ones that remember what it 's like to not understand .
sebastian and i have forgotten some of that .
of course , we could n't have a classroom discussion with tens of thousands of students , so we encouraged and nurtured these online forums .
and finally , from teach for america , i learned that a class is not primarily about information .
more important is motivation and determination .
it was crucial that the students see that we 're working hard for them and they 're all supporting each other .
now , the class ran 10 weeks , and in the end , about half of the 160,000 students watched at least one video each week , and over 20,000 finished all the homework , putting in 50 to 100 hours .
they got this statement of accomplishment .
so what have we learned ?
well , we tried some old ideas and some new and put them together , but there are more ideas to try .
sebastian 's teaching another class now .
i 'll do one in the fall .
stanford coursera , udacity , mitx and others have more classes coming .
it 's a really exciting time .
but to me , the most exciting part of it is the data that we 're gathering .
we 're gathering thousands of interactions per student per class , billions of interactions altogether , and now we can start analyzing that , and when we learn from that , do experimentations , that 's when the real revolution will come .
and you 'll be able to see the results from a new generation of amazing students .
