we are going to talk today about the sequel of " inconvenient truth . "
it 's time again to talk about " inconvenient truth , " a truth that everyone is concerned about , but nobody is willing to talk about .
somebody has to take the lead , and i decided to do it .
if you are scared by global warming , wait until we learn about local warming .
we will talk today about local warming .
important health message : blogging may be hazardous to your health , especially if you are a male .
this message is given as a public service .
blogging affects your posture . we start with the posture .
this is the posture of ladies who are not blogging ; this is the posture of ladies who are blogging .
this is the natural posture of a man sitting , squatting for ventilation purposes .
and this is the natural posture of a standing man ,
and i think this picture inspired chris to insert me into the lateral thinking session .
this is male blogging posture sitting , and the result is , " for greater comfort , men naturally sit with their legs farther apart than women ,
when working on laptop . however , they will adopt a less natural posture in order to balance it on their laps ,
which resulted in a significant rise of body heat between their thighs . " this is the issue of local warming .
this is a very serious newspaper ; it 's times of england --
very serious . this is a very --
-- gentlemen and ladies , be serious .
this is a very serious research , that you should read the underline .
and be careful , your genes are in danger .
will geeks become endangered species ?
the fact : population growth in countries with high laptop --
i need hans rosling to give me a graph .
global warming fun .
how to take care in five easy steps :
first of all , you can use natural ventilation . you can use body breath .
you should stay cool with the appropriate clothing .
you should care about your posture -- this is not right .
can you extract from chris another minute and a half for me , because i have a video i have to show you .
you are great . this is the correct posture .
another benefit of wi - fi , we learned yesterday about the benefits of wi - fi .
wi - fi enables you to avoid the processor . and there are some enhanced protection measures , which i would like to share with you ,
and i would like , in a minute , to thank philips for helping .
this is a research which was done in '86 , but it 's still valid .
scrotal temperature reflects intratesticular temperature and is lowered by shaving .
by the way , i must admit , my english is not so good ,
i did n't know what is scrotal ; i understand it 's a scrotum .
i guess in plural it 's scrotal , like medium and media .
digital scrotum , digital media .
and only last year i recognized that i 'm a proud scrotum owner .
and this research is being precipitated by the u.s. government ,
so you can see that your tax man is working for good causes .
video : man : the philips bodygroom has a sleek , ergonomic design for a safe and easy way to trim those scruffy underarm hairs , the untidy curls on and around your [ bleep ] , as well as the hard to reach locks on the underside of your
[ bleep ] and [ bleep ] . once you use the bodygroom , the world looks different . and so does your [ bleep ] . these days , with a hair - free back , well - groomed shoulders and an extra optical inch on my [ bleep ] , well , let 's just say life has gotten pretty darn cozy .
yossi vardi : this is one of the most popular viral advertisement of last year , known as the optical inch by philips . let 's applaud philips --
-- for this gesture for humanity .
and this is how they are promoting the product . this is --
i did n't touch it , this is original .
laptop use to solve overpopulation . and if everything failed , there are some secondary uses .
and then our next talk , our next ted if you invite me will be why you should not carry a cell phone in your pocket .
and this is what the young generation says .
and i just want to show you that i 'm not just preaching ,
but i also practice .
4 am in the morning .
you cannot use this picture .
now , i have some mini ted prizes , this is the philips bodygroom , one for our leader .
anybody feels threatened , anybody really need it ?
any lady , any lady ? thank you very much .
