i 'm going to go right into the slides .
and all i 'm going to try and prove to you with these slides is that i do just very straight stuff .
and my ideas are -- in my head , anyway -- they 're very logical and relate to what 's going on and problem solving for clients .
i either convince clients at the end that i solve their problems , or i really do solve their problems , because usually they seem to like it .
let me go right into the slides .
can you turn off the light ? down .
i like to be in the dark .
i do n't want you to see what i 'm doing up here .
anyway , i did this house in santa monica , and it got a lot of notoriety .
in fact , it appeared in a porno comic book , which is the slide on the right .
this is in venice .
i just show it because i want you to know i 'm concerned about context .
on the left - hand side , i had the context of those little houses , and i tried to build a building that fit into that context .
when people take pictures of these buildings out of that context they look really weird , and my premise is that they make a lot more sense when they 're photographed or seen in that space .
and then , once i deal with the context , i then try to make a place that 's comfortable and private and fairly serene , as i hope you 'll find that slide on the right .
and then i did a law school for loyola in downtown l.a.
i was concerned about making a place for the study of law .
and we continue to work with this client .
the building on the right at the top is now under construction .
the garage on the right -- the gray structure -- will be torn down , finally , and several small classrooms will be placed along this avenue that we 've created , this campus .
and it all related to the clients and the students from the very first meeting saying they felt denied a place .
they wanted a sense of place .
and so the whole idea here was to create that kind of space in downtown , in a neighborhood that was difficult to fit into .
and it was my theory , or my point of view , that one did n't upstage the neighborhood -- one made accommodations .
i tried to be inclusive , to include the buildings in the neighborhood , whether they were buildings i liked or not .
in the '60s i started working with paper furniture and made a bunch of stuff that was very successful in bloomingdale 's .
we even made flooring , walls and everything , out of cardboard .
and the success of it threw me for a loop .
i could n't deal with the success of furniture -- i was n't secure enough as an architect -- and so i closed it all up and made furniture that nobody would like .
so , nobody would like this .
and it was in this , preliminary to these pieces of furniture , that ricky and i worked on furniture by the slice .
and after we failed , i just kept failing .
the piece on the left -- and that ultimately led to the piece on the right -- happened when the kid that was working on this took one of those long strings of stuff and folded it up to put it in the wastebasket .
and i put a piece of tape around it , as you see there , and realized you could sit on it , and it had a lot of resilience and strength and so on .
so , it was an accidental discovery .
i got into fish .
i mean , the story i tell is that i got mad at postmodernism -- at po - mo -- and said that fish were 500 million years earlier than man , and if you 're going to go back , we might as well go back to the beginning .
and so i started making these funny things .
and they started to have a life of their own and got bigger -- as the one glass at the walker .
and then , i sliced off the head and the tail and everything and tried to translate what i was learning about the form of the fish and the movement .
and a lot of my architectural ideas that came from it -- accidental , again -- it was an intuitive kind of thing , and i just kept going with it , and made this proposal for a building , which was only a proposal .
i did this building in japan .
i was taken out to dinner after the contract for this little restaurant was signed .
and i love sake and kobe and all that stuff .
and after i got -- i was really drunk -- i was asked to do some sketches on napkins .
and i made some sketches on napkins -- little boxes and morandi - like things that i used to do .
and the client said , " why no fish ? "
and so i made a drawing with a fish , and i left japan .
three weeks later , i received a complete set of drawings saying we 'd won the competition .
now , it 's hard to do . it 's hard to translate a fish form , because they 're so beautiful -- perfect -- into a building or object like this .
and oldenburg , who i work with a little once in a while , told me i could n't do it , and so that made it even more exciting .
but he was right -- i could n't do the tail .
i started to get the head ok , but the tail i could n't do .
it was pretty hard .
the thing on the right is a snake form , a ziggurat .
and i put them together , and you walk between them .
it was a dialog with the context again .
now , if you saw a picture of this as it was published in architectural record -- they did n't show the context , so you would think , " god , what a pushy guy this is . "
but a friend of mine spent four hours wandering around here looking for this restaurant .
could n't find it .
so ... as for craft and technology and all those things that you 've all been talking about , i was thrown for a complete loop .
this was built in six months .
the way we sent drawings to japan : we used the magic computer in michigan that does carved models ,
and we used to make foam models , which that thing scanned .
we made the drawings of the fish and the scales .
and when i got there , everything was perfect -- except the tail .
so , i decided to cut off the head and the tail .
and i made the object on the left for my show at the walker .
and it 's one of the nicest pieces i 've ever made , i think .
and then jay chiat , a friend and client , asked me to do his headquarters building in l.a.
for reasons we do n't want to talk about , it got delayed .
toxic waste , i guess , is the key clue to that one .
and so we built a temporary building -- i 'm getting good at temporary -- and we put a conference room in that 's a fish .
and , finally , jay dragged me to my hometown , toronto , canada .
and there is a story -- it 's a real story -- about my grandmother buying a carp on thursday , bringing it home , putting it in the bathtub when i was a kid .
i played with it in the evening .
when i went to sleep , the next day it was n't there .
and the next night , we had gefilte fish .
and so i set up this interior for jay 's offices and i made a pedestal for a sculpture .
and he did n't buy a sculpture , so i made one .
i went around toronto and found a bathtub like my grandmother 's , and i put the fish in .
it was a joke .
i play with funny people like [ claes ] oldenburg .
we 've been friends for a long time .
and we 've started to work on things .
a few years ago , we did a performance piece in venice , italy , called " il corso del coltello " -- the swiss army knife .
and most of the imagery is -- claes ' , but those two little boys are my sons , and they were claes ' assistants in the play .
he was the swiss army knife .
he was a souvenir salesman who always wanted to be a painter , and i was frankie p. toronto .
p for palladio .
dressed up like the at&t building by claes -- with a fish hat .
the highlight of the performance was at the end .
this beautiful object , the swiss army knife , which i get credit for participating in .
and i can tell you -- it 's totally an oldenburg .
i had nothing to do with it .
the only thing i did was , i made it possible for them to turn those blades so you could sail this thing in the canal , because i love sailing .
we made it into a sailing craft .
i 've been known to mess with things like chain link fencing .
i do it because it 's a curious thing in the culture , when things are made in such great quantities , absorbed in such great quantities , and there 's so much denial about them .
people hate it .
and i 'm fascinated with that , which , like the paper furniture -- it 's one of those materials .
and i 'm always drawn to that .
and so i did a lot of dirty things with chain link , which nobody will forgive me for .
but claes made homage to it in the loyola law school .
and that chain link is really expensive .
it 's in perspective and everything .
and then we did a camp together for children with cancer .
and you can see , we started making a building together .
of course , the milk can is his .
but we were trying to collide our ideas , to put objects next to each other .
like a morandi -- like the little bottles -- composing them like a still life .
and it seemed to work as a way to put he and i together .
then jay chiat asked me to do this building on this funny lot in venice , and i started with this three - piece thing , and you entered in the middle .
and jay asked me what i was going to do with the piece in the middle .
and he pushed that .
and one day i had a -- oh , well , the other way .
i had the binoculars from claes , and i put them there , and i could never get rid of them after that .
oldenburg made the binoculars incredible when he sent me the first model of the real proposal .
it made my building look sick .
and it was this interaction between that kind of , up - the - ante stuff that became pretty interesting .
it led to the building on the left .
and i still think the time magazine picture will be of the binoculars , you know , leaving out the -- what the hell .
i use a lot of metal in my work , and i have a hard time connecting with the craft .
the whole thing about my house , the whole use of rough carpentry and everything , was the frustration with the crafts available .
i said , " if i ca n't get the craft that i want , i 'll use the craft i can get . "
there were plenty of models for that , in rauschenberg and jasper johns , and many artists who were making beautiful art and sculpture with junk materials .
i went into the metal because it was a way of building a building that was a sculpture .
and it was all of one material , and the metal could go on the roof as well as the walls .
the metalworkers , for the most part , do ducts behind the ceilings and stuff .
i was given an opportunity to design an exhibit for the metalworkers ' unions of america and canada in washington , and i did it on the condition that they become my partners in the future and help me with all future metal buildings , etc. etc.
and it 's working very well to have these people , these craftsmen , interested in it .
i just tell the stories .
it 's a way of connecting , at least , with some of those people that are so important to the realization of architecture .
the metal continued into a building -- herman miller , in sacramento .
and it 's just a complex of factory buildings .
and herman miller has this philosophy of having a place -- a people place .
i mean , it 's kind of a trite thing to say , but it is real that they wanted to have a central place where the cafeteria would be , where the people would come and where the people working would interact .
so it 's out in the middle of nowhere , and you approach it .
it 's copper and galvanize .
i used the galvanize and copper in a very light gauge , so it would buckle .
i spent a lot of time undoing richard meier 's aesthetic .
everybody 's trying to get the panels perfect , and i always try to get them sloppy and fuzzy .
and they end up looking like stone .
this is the central area .
there 's a ramp .
and that little dome in there is a building by stanley tigerman .
stanley was instrumental in my getting this job .
and when i was awarded the contract i , at the very beginning , asked the client if they would let stanley do a cameo piece with me .
because these were ideas that we were talking about , building things next to each other , making -- it 's all about [ a ] metaphor for a city , maybe .
and so stanley did the little dome thing .
and we did it over the phone and by fax .
he would send me a fax and show me something .
he 'd made a building with a dome and he had a little tower .
i told him , " no , no , that 's too ongepotchket .
i do n't want the tower . "
so he came back with a simpler building , but he put some funny details on it , and he moved it closer to my building .
and so i decided to put him in a depression .
i put him in a hole and made a kind of a hole that he sits in .
and so then he put two bridges -- this all happened on the fax , going back and forth over a couple of weeks ' period .
and he put these two bridges with pink guardrails on it .
and so then i put this big billboard behind it .
and i call it , " david and goliath . "
and that 's my cafeteria .
in boston , we had that old building on the left .
it was a very prominent building off the freeway , and we added a floor and cleaned it up and fixed it up and used the kind of -- i thought -- the language of the neighborhood , which had these cornices , projecting cornices .
mine got a little exuberant , but i used lead copper , which is a beautiful material , and it turns green in 100 years .
instead of , like , copper in 10 or 15 .
we redid the side of the building and re - proportioned the windows so it sort of fit into the space .
and it surprised both boston and myself that we got it approved , because they have very strict kind of design guideline , and they would n't normally think i would fit them .
the detailing was very careful with the lead copper and making panels and fitting it tightly into the fabric of the existing building .
in barcelona , on las ramblas for some film festival ,
i did the hollywood sign going and coming , made a building out of it , and they built it .
i flew in one night and took this picture .
but they made it a third smaller than my model without telling me .
and then more metal and some chain link in santa monica -- a little shopping center .
and this is a laser laboratory at the university of iowa , in which the fish comes back as an abstraction in the back .
it 's the support labs , which , by some coincidence , required no windows .
and the shape fit perfectly .
i just joined the points .
in the curved part there 's all the mechanical equipment .
that solid wall behind it is a pipe chase -- a pipe canyon -- and so it was an opportunity that i seized , because i did n't have to have any protruding ducts or vents or things in this form .
it gave me an opportunity to make a sculpture out of it .
this is a small house somewhere .
they 've been building it so long i do n't remember where it is .
it 's in the west valley .
and we started with the stream and built the house along the stream -- dammed it up to make a lake .
these are the models .
the reality , with the lake -- the workmanship is pretty bad .
and it reminded me why i play defensively in things like my house .
when you have to do something really cheaply , it 's hard to get perfect corners and stuff .
that big metal thing is a passage , and in it is -- you go downstairs into the living room and then down into the bedroom , which is on the right .
it 's kind of like a whole built town .
i was asked to do a hospital for schizophrenic adolescents at yale .
i thought it was fitting for me to be doing that .
this is a house next to a philip johnson house in minnesota .
the owners had a dilemma -- they asked philip to do it .
he was too busy .
he did n't recommend me , by the way .
we ended up having to make it a sculpture , because the dilemma was , how do you build a building that does n't look like the language ?
is it going to look like this beautiful estate is sub - divided ?
etc. etc.
you 've got the idea .
and so we finally ended up making it .
these people are art collectors .
and we finally made it so it appears very sculptural from the main house and all the windows are on the other side .
and the building is very sculptural as you walk around it .
it 's made of metal and the brown stuff is fin - ply -- it 's that formed lumber from finland .
we used it at loyola on the chapel , and it did n't work .
i keep trying to make it work .
in this case we learned how to detail it .
in cleveland , there 's burnham mall , on the left .
it 's never been finished .
going out to the lake , you can see all those new buildings we built .
and we had the opportunity to build a building on this site .
there 's a railroad track .
this is the city hall over here somewhere , and the courthouse .
and the centerline of the mall goes out .
burnham had designed a railroad station that was never built , and so we followed .
sohio is on the axis here , and we followed the axis , and they 're two kind of goalposts .
and this is our building , which is a corporate headquarters for an insurance company .
we collaborated with oldenburg and put the newspaper on top , folded .
the health club is fastened to the garage with a c - clamp , for cleveland .
you drive down .
so it 's about a 10 - story c - clamp .
and all this stuff at the bottom is a museum , and an idea for a very fancy automobile entry .
this owner has a pet peeve about bad automobile entries .
and this would be a hotel .
so , the centerline of this thing -- we 'd preserve it , and it would start to work with the scale of the new buildings by pelli and kohn pederson fox , etc. , that are underway .
it 's hard to do high - rise .
i feel much more comfortable down here .
this is a piece of property in brentwood .
and a long time ago , about '82 or something , after my house -- i designed a house for myself that would be a village of several pavilions around a courtyard -- and the owner of this lot worked for me and built that actual model on the left .
and she came back , i guess wealthier or something -- something happened -- and asked me to design a house for her on this site .
and following that basic idea of the village , we changed it as we got into it .
i locked the house into the site by cutting the back end -- here you see on the photographs of the site -- slicing into it and putting all the bathrooms and dressing rooms like a retaining wall , creating a lower level zone for the master bedroom , which i designed like a kind of a barge , looking like a boat .
and that 's it , built .
the dome was a request from the client .
she wanted a dome somewhere in the house .
she did n't care where .
when you sleep in this bedroom , i hope -- i mean , i have n't slept in it yet .
i 've offered to marry her so i could sleep there , but she said i did n't have to do that .
but when you 're in that room , you feel like you 're on a kind of barge on some kind of lake .
and it 's very private .
the landscape is being built around to create a private garden .
and then up above there 's a garden on this side of the living room , and one on the other side .
these are n't focused very well .
i do n't know how to do it from here .
focus the one on the right .
it 's up there .
left -- it 's my right .
anyway , you enter into a garden with a beautiful grove of trees .
that 's the living room .
servants ' quarters .
a guest bedroom , which has this dome with marble on it .
and then you enter into the living room and then so on .
this is the bedroom .
you come down from this level along the stairway , and you enter the bedroom here , going into the lake .
and the bed is back in this space , with windows looking out onto the lake .
these stonehenge things were designed to give foreground and to create a greater depth in this shallow lot .
the material is lead copper , like in the building in boston .
and so it was an intent to make this small piece of land -- it 's 100 by 250 -- into a kind of an estate by separating these areas and making the living room and dining room into this pavilion with a high space in it .
and this happened by accident that i got this right on axis with the dining room table .
it looks like i got a baldessari painting for free .
but the idea is , the windows are all placed so you see pieces of the house outside .
eventually this will be screened -- these trees will come up -- and it will be very private .
and you feel like you 're in your own kind of village .
this is for michael eisner -- disney .
we 're doing some work for him .
and this is in anaheim , california , and it 's a freeway building .
you go under this bridge at about 65 miles an hour , and there 's another bridge here .
and you 're through this room in a split second , and the building will sort of reflect that .
on the backside , it 's much more humane -- entrance , dining hall , etc.
and then this thing here -- i 'm hoping as you drive by you 'll hear the picket fence effect of the sound hitting it .
kind of a fun thing to do .
i 'm doing a building in switzerland , basel , which is an office building for a furniture company .
and we struggled with the image .
these are the early studies , but they have to sell furniture to normal people , so if i did the building and it was too fancy , then people might say , " well , the furniture looks ok in his thing , but no , it ai n't going to look good in my normal building . "
so we 've made a kind of pragmatic slab in the second phase here , and we 've taken the conference facilities and made a villa out of them so that the communal space is very sculptural and separate .
and you 're looking at it from the offices and you create a kind of interaction between these pieces .
this is in paris , along the seine .
palais des sports , the gare de lyon over here .
the minister of finance -- the guy that moved from the louvre -- goes in here .
there 's a new library across the river .
and back in here , in this already treed park , we 're doing a very dense building called the american center , which has a theater , apartments , dance school , an art museum , restaurants and all kinds of -- it 's a very dense program -- bookstores , etc.
in a very tight , small -- this is the ground level .
and the french have this extraordinary way of screwing things up by taking a beautiful site and cutting the corner off .
they call it the plan coupe .
and i struggled with that thing -- how to get around the corner .
these are the models for it .
i showed you the other model , the one -- this is the way i organized myself so i could make the drawing -- so i understood the problem .
i was trying to get around this plan coupe -- how do you do it ?
apartments , etc.
and these are the kind of study models we did .
and the one on the left is pretty awful .
you can see why i was ready to commit suicide when this one was built .
but out of it came finally this resolution , where the elevator piece worked frontally to this , parallel to this street , and also parallel to here .
and then this kind of twist , with this balcony and the skirt , kind of like a ballerina lifting her skirt to let you into the foyer .
the restaurants here -- the apartments and the theater , etc.
so it would all be built in stone , in french limestone , except for this metal piece .
and it faces into a park .
and the idea was to make this express the energy of this .
on the side facing the street it 's much more normal , except i slipped a few mansards down , so that coming on the point , these housing units made a gesture to the corner .
and this will be some kind of high - tech billboard .
if any of you guys have any ideas for it , please contact me .
i do n't know what to do .
jay chiat is a glutton for punishment , and he hired me to do a house for him in the hamptons .
and it 's got a fish .
and i keep thinking , " this is going to be the last fish . "
it 's like a drug addict .
i say , " i 'm not going to do it anymore -- i do n't want to do it anymore -- i 'm not going to do it . "
and then i do it .
there it is .
but it 's the living room .
and this piece here is -- i do n't know what it is .
i just added it so that we 'd have enough money in the budget so we could take something out .
this is euro disney , and i 've worked with all of the guys that presented to you earlier .
we 've had a lot of fun working together .
i think i 'm from mars for them , and they are for me , but somehow we all manage to work together , and i think , productively .
so far .
this is a shopping thing .
you come into the magic kingdom and the hotel that tony baxter 's group is doing out here . and then this is a kind of a shopping mall , with a rodeo and restaurants .
and another restaurant .
what i did -- because of the paris skies being quite dull , i made a light grid that 's perpendicular to the train station , to the route of the train .
it looks like it 's kind of been there , and then crashed all these simpler forms into it .
the light grid will have a light , be lit up at night and give a kind of light ceiling .
in switzerland -- germany , actually -- on the rhine across from basel , we did a furniture factory and a furniture museum .
and i tried to -- there 's a nick grimshaw building over here , there 's an oldenburg sculpture over here -- i tried to make a relationship urbanistically .
and i do n't gave good slides to show -- it 's just been completed -- but this piece here is this building , and these pieces here and here .
and as you pass by it 's always part -- you see it as all of these pieces accrue and become part of an overall neighborhood .
it 's plaster and just zinc .
and you wonder , if this is a museum , what it 's going to be like inside ?
if it 's going to be so busy and crazy that you would n't show anything , and just wait .
i 'm so cunning and clever -- i made it quiet and wonderful .
but on the outside it does scream out at you a bit .
it 's actually basically three square rooms with a couple of skylights and stuff .
and from the building in the back , you see it as an iceberg floating by in the hills .
i know i 'm over time .
see , that skylight goes down and becomes that one .
so it 's pretty quiet inside .
this is the disney hall -- the concert hall .
it 's a complicated project .
it has a chamber hall .
it 's related to an existing chandler pavilion that was built with a lot of love and tears and caring .
and it 's not a great building , but i approached it optimistically , that we would make a compositional relationship between us that would strengthen both of us .
and the plan of this -- it 's a concert hall .
this is the foyer , which is kind of a garden structure .
there 's commercial at the ground floor .
these are offices , which , really , in the competition , we did n't have to design .
but finally , there 's a hotel there .
these were the kind of relationships made to the chandler , composing these elevations together and relating them to the buildings that existed -- to moca , etc.
the acoustician in the competition gave us criteria , which led to this compartmentalized scheme , which we found out after the competition would not work at all .
but everybody liked these forms and liked the space , and so that 's one of the problems of a competition .
you have to then try and get that back in some way .
and we studied many models .
this was our original model .
these were the three buildings that were the ideal -- the concertgebouw , boston and berlin .
everybody liked the surround .
actually , this is the smallest hall in size , and it has more seats than any of these because it has double balconies .
our client does n't want balconies , so -- and when we met our new acoustician , he told us this was the right shape or this was the right shape .
and we tried many shapes , trying to get the energy of the original design within an acoustical , acceptable format .
we finally settled on a shape that was the proportion of the concertgebouw with the sloping outside walls , which the acoustician said were crucial to this and later decided they were n't , but now we have them .
and our idea is to make the seating carriage very sculptural and out of wood and like a big boat sitting in this plaster room .
that 's the idea .
and the corners would have skylights and these columns would be structural .
and the nice thing about introducing columns is they give you a kind of sense of proscenium from wherever you sit , and create intimacy .
now , this is not a final design -- these are just on the way to being -- and so i would n't take it literally , except the feeling of the space .
we studied the acoustics with laser stuff , and they bounce them off this and see where it all works .
but you get the sense of the hall in section .
most halls come straight down into a proscenium .
in this case we 're opening it back up and getting skylights in the four corners .
and so it will be quite a different shape .
the original building , because it was frog - like , fit nicely on the site and cranked itself well .
when you get into a box , it 's harder to do it -- and here we are , struggling with how to put the hotel in .
and this is a teapot i designed for alessi .
i just stuck it on there .
but this is how i do work . i do take pieces and bits and look at it and struggle with it and cut it away .
and of course it 's not going to look like that , but it is the crazy way i tend to work .
and then finally , in l.a. i was asked to do a sculpture at the foot of interstate bank tower , the highest building in l.a.
larry halprin is doing the stairs .
and i was asked to do a fish , and so i did a snake .
it 's a public space , and i made it kind of a garden structure , and you can go in it .
it 's a kiva , and larry 's putting some water in there , and it works much better than a fish .
in barcelona i was asked to do a fish , and we 're working on that , at the foot of a ritz - carlton tower being done by
skidmore , owings and merrill .
and the ritz - carlton tower is being designed with exposed steel , non - fire proof , much like those old gas tanks .
and so we took the language of this exposed steel and used it , perverted it , into the form of the fish , and created a kind of a 19th - century contraption that looks like , that will sit -- this is the beach and the harbor out in front , and this is really a shopping center with department stores .
and we split these bridges .
originally , this was all solid with a hole in it .
we cut them loose and made several bridges and created a kind of a foreground for this hotel .
we showed this to the hotel people the other day , and they were terrified and said that nobody would come to the ritz - carlton anymore , because of this fish .
and finally , i just threw these in -- lou danziger .
i did n't expect lou danziger to be here , but this is a building i did for him in 1964 , i think .
a little studio -- and it 's sadly for sale .
time goes on .
and this is my son working with me on a small fast - food thing .
he designed the robot as the cashier , and the head moves , and i did the rest of it .
and the food was n't as good as the stuff , and so it failed .
it should have been the other way around -- the food should have been good first .
it did n't work .
thank you very much .
