sheryl shade : hi , aimee . aimee mullins : hi . ss : aimee and i thought we 'd just talk a little bit , and i wanted her to tell all of you what makes her a distinctive athlete .
am : well , for those of you who have seen the picture in the little bio -- it might have given it away --
i 'm a double amputee , and i was born without fibulas in both legs .
i was amputated at age one , and i 've been running like hell ever since , all over the place .
ss : well , why do n't you tell them how you got to georgetown -- why do n't we start there ?
why do n't we start there ?
am : i 'm a senior in georgetown in the foreign service program .
i won a full academic scholarship out of high school .
they pick three students out of the nation every year to get involved in international affairs , and so i won a full ride to georgetown
and i 've been there for four years . love it .
ss : when aimee got there , she decided that she 's , kind of , curious about track and field ,
so she decided to call someone and start asking about it .
so , why do n't you tell that story ?
am : yeah . well , i guess i 've always been involved in sports .
i played softball for five years growing up .
i skied competitively throughout high school , and i got a little restless in college because i was n't doing anything for about a year or two sports - wise .
and i 'd never competed on a disabled level , you know --
i 'd always competed against other able - bodied athletes .
that 's all i 'd ever known .
in fact , i 'd never even met another amputee until i was 17 .
and i heard that they do these track meets with all disabled runners , and i figured , " oh , i do n't know about this , but before i judge it , let me go see what it 's all about . "
so , i booked myself a flight to boston in '95 , 19 years old and definitely the dark horse candidate at this race . i 'd never done it before .
i went out on a gravel track a couple of weeks before this meet to see how far i could run , and about 50 meters was enough for me , panting and heaving .
and i had these legs that were made of a wood and plastic compound , attached with velcro straps -- big , thick , five - ply wool socks on -- you know , not the most comfortable things , but all i 'd ever known .
and i 'm up there in boston against people wearing legs made of all things -- carbon graphite and , you know , shock absorbers in them and all sorts of things -- and they 're all looking at me like , ok , we know who 's not going to win this race .
and , i mean , i went up there expecting -- i do n't know what i was expecting -- but , you know , when i saw a man who was missing an entire leg go up to the high jump , hop on one leg to the high jump and clear it at six feet , two inches ...
dan o'brien jumped 5'11 " in '96 in atlanta , i mean , if it just gives you a comparison of -- these are truly accomplished athletes , without qualifying that word " athlete . "
and so i decided to give this a shot : heart pounding , i ran my first race and i beat the national record - holder by three hundredths of a second , and became the new national record - holder on my first try out .
and , you know , people said , " aimee , you know , you 've got speed -- you 've got natural speed -- but you do n't have any skill or finesse going down that track .
you were all over the place .
we all saw how hard you were working . "
and so i decided to call the track coach at georgetown . and i thank god i did n't know just how huge this man is in the track and field world .
he 's coached five olympians , and the man 's office is lined from floor to ceiling with all america certificates of all these athletes he 's coached . he 's just a rather intimidating figure .
and i called him up and said , " listen , i ran one race and i won . . . "
" i want to see if i can , you know -- i need to just see if i can sit in on some of your practices , see what drills you do and whatever . "
that 's all i wanted -- just two practices .
" can i just sit in and see what you do ? "
and he said , " well , we should meet first , before we decide anything . "
you know , he 's thinking , " what am i getting myself into ? "
so , i met the man , walked in his office , and saw these posters and magazine covers of people he has coached .
and we got to talking , and it turned out to be a great partnership because he 'd never coached a disabled athlete , so therefore he had no preconceived notions of what i was or was n't capable of , and i 'd never been coached before . so this was like , " here we go -- let 's start on this trip . "
so he started giving me four days a week of his lunch break , his free time , and i would come up to the track and train with him .
so that 's how i met frank .
that was fall of '95 . but then , by the time that winter was rolling around , he said , " you know , you 're good enough .
you can run on our women 's track team here . "
and i said , " no , come on . "
and he said , " no , no , really . you can .
you can run with our women 's track team . "
in the spring of 1996 , with my goal of making the u.s. paralympic team that may coming up full speed , i joined the women 's track team .
and no disabled person had ever done that -- run at a collegiate level .
so i do n't know , it started to become an interesting mix .
ss : well , on your way to the olympics , a couple of memorable events happened at georgetown .
why do n't you just tell them ?
am : yes , well , you know , i 'd won everything as far as the disabled meets -- everything i competed in -- and , you know , training in georgetown and knowing that i was going to have to get used to seeing the backs of all these women 's shirts -- you know , i 'm running against the next flo - jo -- and they 're all looking at me like , " hmm , what 's , you know , what 's going on here ? "
and putting on my georgetown uniform
and going out there and knowing that , you know , in order to become better -- and i 'm already the best in the country -- you know , you have to train with people who are inherently better than you .
and i went out there and made it to the big east , which was sort of the championship race at the end of the season . it was really , really hot .
and it 's the first -- i had just gotten these new sprinting legs that you see in that bio , and i did n't realize at that time that the amount of sweating i would be doing in the sock -- it actually acted like a lubricant and i 'd be , kind of , pistoning in the socket . and at about 85 meters of my 100 meters sprint , in all my glory , i came out of my leg .
like , i almost came out of it , in front of , like , 5,000 people .
and i , i mean , was just mortified -- because i was signed up for the 200 , you know , which went off in a half hour .
i went to my coach : " please , do n't make me do this . "
i ca n't do this in front of all those people . my legs will come off .
and if it came off at 85 there 's no way i 'm going 200 meters .
and he just sat there like this .
my pleas fell on deaf ears , thank god . because you know , the man is from brooklyn ; he 's a big man . he says , " aimee , so what if your leg falls off ?
you pick it up , you put the damn thing back on , and finish the goddamn race ! "
and i did . so , he kept me in line .
he kept me on the right track .
ss : so , then aimee makes it to the 1996 paralympics , and she 's all excited . her family 's coming down -- it 's a big deal .
it 's now two years that you 've been running ?
am : no , a year .
ss : a year . and why do n't you tell them what happened right before you go run your race ?
am : okay , well , atlanta .
the paralympics , just for a little bit of clarification , are the olympics for people with physical disabilities -- amputees , persons with cerebral palsy , and wheelchair athletes -- as opposed to the special olympics , which deals with people with mental disabilities .
so , here we are , a week after the olympics and down at atlanta , and i 'm just blown away by the fact that just a year ago , i got out on a gravel track and could n't run 50 meters .
and so , here i am -- never lost .
i set new records at the u.s. nationals -- the olympic trials -- that may , and was sure that i was coming home with the gold .
i was also the only , what they call " bilateral bk " -- below the knee .
i was the only woman who would be doing the long jump .
i had just done the long jump , and a guy who was missing two legs came up to me and says , " how do you do that ? you know , we 're supposed to have a planar foot , so we ca n't get off on the springboard . "
i said , " well , i just did it . no one told me that . "
so , it 's funny -- i 'm three inches within the world record -- and kept on from that point , you know , so i 'm signed up in the long jump -- signed up ? no , i made it for the long jump and the 100 - meter .
and i 'm sure of it , you know ?
i made the front page of my hometown paper that i delivered for six years , you know ?
it was , like , this is my time for shine .
and we 're at the trainee warm - up track , which is a few blocks away from the olympic stadium .
these legs that i was on , which i 'll take out right now --
i was the first person in the world on these legs . i was the guinea pig . , i 'm telling you , this was , like -- talk about a tourist attraction .
everyone was taking pictures -- " what is this girl running on ? "
and i 'm always looking around , like , where is my competition ?
it 's my first international meet .
i tried to get it out of anybody i could , you know , " who am i running against here ? "
" oh , aimee , we 'll have to get back to you on that one . "
i wanted to find out times .
" do n't worry , you 're doing great . "
this is 20 minutes before my race in the olympic stadium , and they post the heat sheets . and i go over and look .
and my fastest time , which was the world record , was 15.77 .
then i 'm looking : the next lane , lane two , is 12.8 . lane three is 12.5 . lane four is 12.2 . i said , " what 's going on ? "
and they shove us all into the shuttle bus , and all the women there are missing a hand .
so , i 'm just , like -- they 're all looking at me like ' which one of these is not like the other , ' you know ?
i 'm sitting there , like , " oh , my god . oh , my god . "
you know , i 'd never lost anything , like , whether it would be the scholarship or , you know , i 'd won five golds when i skied . in everything , i came in first .
and georgetown -- that was great .
i was losing , but it was the best training because this was atlanta .
here we are , like , crème de la crème , and there is no doubt about it , that i 'm going to lose big .
and , you know , i 'm just thinking ,
" oh , my god , my whole family got in a van and drove down here from pennsylvania . "
and , you know , i was the only female u.s. sprinter .
so they call us out and , you know -- " ladies , you have one minute . " and i remember putting my blocks in and just feeling horrified because there was just this murmur coming over the crowd , like , the ones who are close enough to the starting line to see .
and i 'm like , " i know ! look ! this is n't right . "
and i 'm thinking that 's my last card to play here ; if i 'm not going to beat these girls , i 'm going to mess their heads a little , you know ?
i mean , it was definitely the " rocky iv " sensation of me versus germany , and everyone else -- estonia and poland -- was in this heat .
and the gun went off , and all i remember was finishing last and fighting back tears of frustration and incredible -- incredible -- this feeling of just being overwhelmed .
and i had to think , " why did i do this ? " if i had won everything -- but it was like , what was the point ?
all this training -- i had transformed my life .
i became a collegiate athlete , you know . i became an olympic athlete .
and it made me really think about how the achievement was getting there .
i mean , the fact that i set my sights , just a year and three months before , on becoming an olympic athlete and saying , " here 's my life going in this direction -- and i want to take it here for a while , and just seeing how far i could push it . "
and the fact that i asked for help -- how many people jumped on board ?
how many people gave of their time and their expertise , and their patience , to deal with me ?
and that was this collective glory -- that there was , you know , 50 people behind me that had joined in this incredible experience of going to atlanta .
so , i apply this sort of philosophy now to everything i do : sitting back and realizing the progression , how far you 've come at this day to this goal , you know .
it 's important to focus on a goal , i think , but also recognize the progression on the way there and how you 've grown as a person .
that 's the achievement , i think . that 's the real achievement . ss : why do n't you show them your legs ?
am : oh , sure .
ss : you know , show us more than one set of legs .
am : well , these are my pretty legs .
no , these are my cosmetic legs , actually , and they 're absolutely beautiful .
you 've got to come up and see them .
there are hair follicles on them , and i can paint my toenails .
and , seriously , like , i can wear heels .
like , you guys do n't understand what that 's like to be able to just go into a shoe store and buy whatever you want .
ss : you got to pick your height ?
am : i got to pick my height , exactly .
patrick ewing , who played for georgetown in the '80s , comes back every summer .
and i had incessant fun making fun of him in the training room because he 'd come in with foot injuries .
i 'm like , " get it off ! do n't worry about it , you know .
you can be eight feet tall . just take them off . "
he did n't find it as humorous as i did , anyway .
ok , now , these are my sprinting legs , made of carbon graphite , like i said , and i 've got to make sure i 've got the right socket .
no , i 've got so many legs in here .
these are -- do you want to hold that actually ?
that 's another leg i have for , like , tennis and softball .
it has a shock absorber in it so it , like , " shhhh , " makes this neat sound when you jump around on it . all right .
and then this is the silicon sheath i roll over , to keep it on . which , when i sweat , you know , i 'm pistoning out of it .
ss : are you a different height ?
am : in these ?
ss : in these .
am : i do n't know . i do n't think so .
i may be a little taller . i actually can put both of them on .
ss : she ca n't really stand on these legs . she has to be moving , so ...
am : yeah , i definitely have to be moving , and balance is a little bit of an art in them .
but without having the silicon sock , i 'm just going to try slip in it .
and so , i run on these , and have shocked half the world on these .
these are supposed to simulate the actual form of a sprinter when they run .
if you ever watch a sprinter , the ball of their foot is the only thing that ever hits the track . so when i stand in these legs , my hamstring and my glutes are contracted , as they would be had i had feet and were standing on the ball of my feet .
am : it 's a company in san diego called flex - foot .
and i was a guinea pig , as i hope to continue to be in every new form of prosthetic limbs that come out .
but actually these , like i said , are still the actual prototype .
i need to get some new ones because the last meet i was at , they were everywhere . you know , it 's like a big -- it 's come full circle .
moderator : aimee and the designer of them will be at tedmed 2 , and we 'll talk about the design of them .
am : yes , we 'll do that .
ss : yes , there you go .
am : so , these are the sprint legs , and i can put my other ...
ss : can you tell about who designed your other legs ?
am : yes . these i got in a place called bournemouth , england , about two hours south of london , and i 'm the only person in the united states with these , which is a crime because they are so beautiful .
and i do n't even mean , like , because of the toes and everything . for me , while i 'm such a serious athlete on the track , i want to be feminine off the track , and i think it 's so important not to be limited in any capacity , whether it 's , you know , your mobility or even fashion .
i mean , i love the fact that i can go in anywhere and pick out what i want -- the shoes i want , the skirts i want -- and i 'm hoping to try to bring these over here and make them accessible to a lot of people .
they 're also silicon . this is a really basic , basic prosthetic limb under here .
it 's like a barbie foot under this .
it is . it 's just stuck in this position , so i have to wear a two - inch heel .
and , i mean , it 's really -- let me take this off so you can see it .
i do n't know how good you can see it , but , like , it really is .
there 're veins on the feet , and then my heel is pink ,
and my achilles ' tendon -- that moves a little bit .
and it 's really an amazing store . i got them a year and two weeks ago .
and this is just a silicon piece of skin .
i mean , what happened was , two years ago this man in belgium was saying , " god , if i can go to madame tussauds ' wax museum and see jerry hall replicated down to the color of her eyes , looking so real as if she breathed , why ca n't they build a limb for someone that looks like a leg , or an arm , or a hand ? "
i mean , they make ears for burn victims .
they do amazing stuff with silicon .
ss : two weeks ago , aimee was up for the arthur ashe award at the espys .
and she came into town and she rushed around and she said , " i have to buy some new shoes ! "
we 're an hour before the espys , and she thought she 'd gotten a two - inch heel but she 'd actually bought a three - inch heel .
am : and this poses a problem for me , because it means i 'm walking like that all night long .
ss : for 45 minutes . luckily , the hotel was terrific .
they got someone to come in and saw off the shoes .
am : i said to the receptionist -- i mean , i am just harried , and sheryl 's at my side --
i said , " look , do you have anybody here who could help me ? because i have this problem ... "
you know , at first they were just going to write me off , like , " if you do n't like your shoes , sorry . it 's too late . "
" no , no , no , no. i 've got these special feet
that need a two - inch heel . i have a three - inch heel . i need a little bit off . "
they did n't even want to go there .
they did n't even want to touch that one . they just did it .
no , these legs are great .
i 'm actually going back in a couple of weeks to get some improvements .
i want to get legs like these made for flat feet so i can wear sneakers , because i ca n't with these ones .
so ... moderator : that 's it .
