i 'm dr. david hanson , and i build robots with character .
and by that , i mean that i develop robots that are characters , but also robots that will eventually come to empathize with you .
so we 're starting with a variety of technologies that have converged into these conversational character robots that can see faces , make eye contact with you , make a full range of facial expressions , understand speech and begin to model how you 're feeling and who you are , and build a relationship with you .
i developed a series of technologies that allowed the robots to make more realistic facial expressions than previously achieved , on lower power , which enabled the walking biped robots , the first androids .
so , it 's a full range of facial expressions simulating all the major muscles in the human face , running on very small batteries , extremely lightweight .
the materials that allowed the battery - operated facial expressions is a material that we call frubber , and it actually has three major innovations in the material that allow this to happen .
one is hierarchical pores ,
and the other is a macro - molecular nanoscale porosity in the material .
there he 's starting to walk .
this is at the korean advanced institute of science and technology .
i built the head . they built the body .
so the goal here is to achieve sentience in machines , and not just sentience , but empathy .
we 're working with the machine perception laboratory at the u.c. san diego .
they have this really remarkable facial expression technology that recognizes facial expressions , what facial expressions you 're making .
it also recognizes where you 're looking , your head orientation .
we 're emulating all the major facial expressions , and then controlling it with the software that we call the character engine .
and here is a little bit of the technology that 's involved in that .
in fact , right now -- plug it from here , and then plug it in here , and now let 's see if it gets my facial expressions .
okay . so i 'm smiling .
now i 'm frowning .
and this is really heavily backlit .
okay , here we go .
oh , it 's so sad .
okay , so you smile , frowning .
so his perception of your emotional states is very important for machines to effectively become empathetic .
machines are becoming devastatingly capable of things like killing . right ?
those machines have no place for empathy .
and there is billions of dollars being spent on that .
character robotics could plant the seed for robots that actually have empathy .
so , if they achieve human level intelligence or , quite possibly , greater than human levels of intelligence , this could be the seeds of hope for our future .
so , we 've made 20 robots in the last eight years , during the course of getting my ph.d.
and then i started hanson robotics , which has been developing these things for mass manufacturing .
this is one of our robots that we showed at wired nextfest a couple of years ago .
and it sees multiple people in a scene , remembers where individual people are , and looks from person to person , remembering people .
so , we 're involving two things .
one , the perception of people ,
and two , the natural interface , the natural form of the interface , so that it 's more intuitive for you to interact with the robot .
you start to believe that it 's alive and aware .
so one of my favorite projects was bringing all this stuff together in an artistic display of an android portrait of science - fiction writer philip k. dick , who wrote great works like , " do androids dream of electric sheep ? "
which was the basis of the movie " bladerunner . "
in these stories , robots often think that they 're human , and they sort of come to life .
so we put his writings , letters , his interviews , correspondences , into a huge database of thousands of pages , and then used some natural language processing to allow you to actually have a conversation with him .
and it was kind of spooky , because he would say these things that just sounded like they really understood you .
and this is one of the most exciting projects that we 're developing , which is a little character that 's a spokesbot for friendly artificial intelligence , friendly machine intelligence .
and we 're getting this mass - manufactured .
we specked it out to actually be doable with a very , very low - cost bill of materials , so that it can become a childhood companion for kids .
interfacing with the internet , it gets smarter over the years .
as artificial intelligence evolves , so does his intelligence .
chris anderson : thank you so much . that 's incredible .
