i grew up in northern ireland , right up in the very , very north end of it there , where it 's absolutely freezing cold .
this was me running around in the back garden mid - summer .
i could n't pick a career .
in ireland the obvious choice is the military , but to be honest it actually kind of sucks .
my mother wanted me to be a dentist .
but the problem was that people kept blowing everything up . so i actually went to school in belfast , which was where all the action happened .
and this was a pretty common sight .
the school i went to was pretty boring .
they forced us to learn things like latin .
the school teachers were n't having much fun , the sports were very dirty or very painful .
so i cleverly chose rowing , which i got very good at .
and i was actually rowing for my school here until this fateful day , and i flipped over right in front of the entire school .
and that was the finishing post right there .
so this was extremely embarrassing .
but our school at that time got a grant from the government , and they got an incredible computer -- the research machine 3dz -- and they left the programming manuals lying around .
and so students like myself with nothing to do , we would learn how to program it .
also around this time , at home , this was the computer that people were buying .
it was called the sinclair zx 80. this was a 1k computer , and you 'd buy your programs on cassette tape .
actually i 'm just going to pause for one second , because i heard that there 's a prerequisite to speak here at ted -- you had to have a picture of yourself from the old days with big hair .
so i brought a picture with big hair .
. i just want to get that out of the way .
so after the sinclair zx 80 came along the very cleverly named sinclair zx 81 .
and -- you see the picture at the bottom ?
there 's a picture of a guy doing homework with his son .
that 's what they thought they had built it for .
the reality is we got the programming manual and we started making games for it . we were programming in basic ,
which is a pretty awful language for games , so we ended up learning assembly language so we could really take control of the hardware .
this is the guy that invented it , sir clive sinclair , and he 's showing his machine .
you had this same thing in america , it was called the timex sinclair1000 .
to play a game in those days you had to have an imagination to believe that you were really playing " battlestar galactica . "
the graphics were just horrible .
you had to have an even better imagination to play this game , " death rider . "
but of course the scientists could n't help themselves . they started making their own video games .
this is one of my favorite ones here , where they have rabbit breeding , so males choose the lucky rabbit .
it was around this time we went from 1k to 16k , which was quite the leap .
and if you 're wondering how much 16k is , this ebay logo here is 16k .
and in that amount of memory someone programmed a full flight simulation program .
and that 's what it looked like .
i spent ages flying this flight simulator , and i honestly believed i could fly airplanes by the end of it .
here 's clive sinclair now launching his color computer .
he 's recognized as being the father of video games in europe .
he 's a multi - millionaire , and i think that 's why he 's smiling in this photograph .
so i went on for the next 20 years or so making a lot of different games .
some of the highlights were things like " the terminator , " " aladdin , " the " teenage mutant hero turtles . "
because i was from the united kingdom , they thought the word ninja was a little too mean for children , so they decided to call it hero instead .
i personally preferred the spanish version , which was " tortugas ninja . "
that was much better .
then the last game i did was based on trying to get the video game industry and hollywood to actually work together on something -- instead of licensing from each other , to actually work .
now , chris did ask me to bring some statistics with me , so i 've done that .
the video game industry in 2005 became a 29 billion dollar business .
it grows every year .
last year was the biggest year .
by 2008 , we 're going to kick the butt of the music industry .
by 2010 , we 're going to hit 42 billion .
43 percent of gamers are female .
so there 's a lot more female gamers than people are really aware .
the average age of gamers ?
well , obviously it 's for children , right ?
well , no , actually it 's 30 years old .
and interestingly , the people who buy the most games are 37 .
so 37 is our target audience .
all video games are violent .
of course the newspapers love to beat on this . but 83 percent of games do n't have any mature content whatsoever , so it 's just not true .
online gaming statistics . i brought some stuff on " world of warcraft . " it 's 5.5 million players .
it makes about 80 million bucks a month in subscriptions .
it costs 50 bucks just to install it on your computer , making the publisher about another 275 million .
the game costs about 80 million dollars to make , so basically it pays for itself in about a month .
a player in a game called " project entropia " actually bought his own island for 26,500 dollars .
you have to remember that this is not a real island .
he did n't actually buy anything , just some data .
but he got great terms on it .
this purchase included mining and hunting rights , ownership of all land on the island , and a castle with no furniture included .
this market is now estimated at over 800 million dollars annually .
and what 's interesting about it is the market was actually created by the gamers themselves .
they found clever ways to trade items and to sell their accounts to each other so that they could make money while they were playing their games .
i dove onto ebay a couple of days ago
just to see what was gong on , typed in world of warcraft , got 6,000 items .
i liked this one the best :
a level 60 warlock with lots of epics for 174,000 dollars .
it 's like that guy obviously had some pain while making it .
so as far as popularity of games , what do you think these people are doing here ?
it turns out they 're actually in hollywood bowl in los angeles listening to the l.a. philharmonic playing video game music .
that 's what the show looks like .
you would expect it to be cheesy , but it 's not .
it 's very , very epic and a very beautiful concert .
and the people that went there absolutely loved it .
what do you think these people are doing ?
they 're actually bringing their computers so they can play games against each other .
and this is happening in every city around the world .
this is happening in your local cities too , you 're probably just not aware of it .
now , chris told me that you had a timeline video a few years ago here just to show how video game graphics have been improving .
i wanted to update that video and give you a new look at it .
but what i want you to do is to try to understand it .
we 're on this curve , and the graphics are getting so ridiculously better .
and i 'm going to show you up to maybe 2007 .
but i want you to try and think about what games could look like 10 years from now .
so we 're going to start that video .
video : throughout human history people have played games .
as man 's intellect and technology have evolved so too have the games he plays .
david perry : the thing again i want you to think about is , do n't look at these graphics and think of that 's the way it is .
think about that 's where we are right now , and the curve that we 're on means that this is going to continue to get better .
this is an example of the kind of graphics you need to be able to draw if you wanted to get a job in the video game industry today .
you need to be really an incredible artist .
and once we get enough of those guys , we 're going to want more fantasy artists that can create places we 've never been to before , or characters that we 've just never seen before .
so the obvious thing for me to talk about today is graphics and audio .
but if you were to go to a game developers conference , what they 're all talking about is emotion , purpose , meaning , understanding and feeling .
you 'll hear about talks like , can a video game make you cry ?
and these are the kind of topics we really actually care about .
i came across a student who 's absolutely excellent at expressing himself , and this student agreed that he would not show his video to anybody until you here at ted had seen it .
so i 'd like to play this video .
so this is a student 's opinion on what his experience of games are .
video : i , like many of you , live somewhere between reality and video games .
some part of me -- a true living , breathing person -- has become programmed , electronic and virtual .
the boundary of my brain that divides real from fantasy has finally begun to crumble .
i 'm a video game addict and this is my story .
in the year of my birth the nintendo entertainment system also went into development .
i played in the backyard , learned to read , and even ate some of my vegetables .
most of my childhood was spent playing with legos .
but as was the case for most of my generation , i spent a lot of time in front of the tv .
mr. rogers , walt disney , nick junior ,
and roughly half a million commercials have undoubtedly left their mark on me .
when my parents bought my sister and i our first nintendo , whatever inherent addictive quality this early interactive electronic entertainment possessed quickly took hold of me .
at some point something clicked .
with the combination of simple , interactive stories and the warmth of the tv set , my simple 16 - bit nintendo became more than just an escape .
it became an alternate existence , my virtual reality .
i 'm a video game addict , and it 's not because of or nights i have gone without sleep to finish the next level .
it is because i have had life - altering experiences in virtual space , and video games had begun to erode my own understanding of what is real and what is not .
i 'm addicted , because even though i know i 'm losing my grip on reality , i still crave more .
from an early age i learned to invest myself emotionally in what unfolded before me on screen .
today , after 20 years of watching tv geared to make me emotional , even a decent insurance commercial can bring tears to my eyes .
i am just one of a new generation that is growing up . a generation who may experience much more meaning through video games than they will through the real world .
video games are nearing an evolutionary leap , a point where game worlds will look and feel just as real as the films we see in theatres , or the news we watch on tv .
and while my sense of free will in these virtual worlds may still be limited , what i do learn applies to my real life .
play enough video games and eventually you will really believe you can snowboard , fly a plane , drive a nine - second quarter mile , or kill a man .
i know i can .
unlike any pop culture phenomenon before it , video games actually allow us to become part of the machine .
they allow us to sublimate into the culture of interactive , downloaded , streaming , hd reality .
we are interacting with our entertainment .
i have come to expect this level of interaction .
without it , the problems faced in the real world -- poverty , war , disease and genocide -- lack the levity they should .
their importance blends into the sensationalized drama of prime time tv .
but the beauty of video games today lies not in the lifelike graphics , the vibrating joysticks or virtual surround sound .
it lies in that these games are beginning to make me emotional .
i have fought in wars , feared for my own survival , watched my cohorts die on beaches and woods that look and feel more real than any textbook or any news story .
the people who create these games are smart .
they know what makes me scared , excited , panicked , proud or sad .
then they use these emotions to dimensionalize the worlds they create .
a well - designed video game will seamlessly weave the user into the fabric of the virtual experience .
as one becomes more experienced the awareness of physical control melts away .
i know what i want and i do it .
no buttons to push , no triggers to pull , just me and the game .
my fate and the fate of the world around me lie inside my hands .
i know violent video games make my mother worry .
what troubles me is not that video game violence is becoming more and more like real life violence , but that real life violence is starting to look more and more like a video game .
these are all troubles outside of myself .
i , however , have a problem very close to home .
something has happened to my brain .
perhaps there is a single part of our brain that holds all of our gut instincts , the things we know to do before we even think .
while some of these instincts may be innate , most are learned , and all of them are hardwired into our brains .
these instincts are essential for survival in both real and virtual worlds .
only in recent years has the technology behind video games allowed for a true overlap in stimuli .
as gamers we are now living by the same laws of physics in the same cities and doing many of the same things we once did in real life , only virtually .
consider this -- my real life car has about 25,000 miles on it .
in all my driving games , i 've driven a total of 31,459 miles .
to some degree i 've learned how to drive from the game .
the sensory cues are very similar . it 's a funny feeling when you have spent more time doing something on the tv than you have in real life .
when i am driving down a road at sunset all i can think is , this is almost as beautiful as my games are . for my virtual worlds are perfect .
more beautiful and rich than the real world around us .
i 'm not sure what the implications of my experience are , but the potential for using realistic video game stimuli in repetition on a vast number of loyal participants is frightening to me .
today i believe big brother would find much more success brainwashing the masses with video games rather than just simply tvs .
video games are fun , engaging , and leave your brain completely vulnerable to re - programming .
but maybe brainwashing is n't always bad .
imagine a game that teaches us to respect each other , or helps us to understand the problems we 're all facing in the real world .
there is a potential to do good as well .
it is critical , as these virtual worlds continue to mirror the real world we live in , that game developers realize that they have tremendous responsibilities before them .
i 'm not sure what the future of video games holds for our civilization .
but as virtual and real world experiences increasingly overlap there is a greater and greater potential for other people to feel the same way i do .
what i have only recently come to realize is that beyond the graphics , sound , game play and emotion it is the power to break down reality that is so fascinating
and addictive to me .
i know that i am losing my grip .
part of me is just waiting to let go .
i know though , that no matter how amazing video games may become , or how flat the real world may seem to us ,
that we must stay aware of what our games are teaching us and how they leave us feeling when we finally do unplug .
dp : wow . i found that video very , very thought provoking ,
and that 's why i wanted to bring it here for you guys to see .
and what was interesting about it is the obvious choice for me to talk about was graphics and audio .
but as you heard , michael talked about all these other elements as well .
video games give an awful lot of other things too , and that 's why people get so addicted .
the most important one being fun .
the name of this track is " the magic to come . "
who is that going to come from ? is it going to come from the best directors in the world as we thought it probably would ?
i do n't think so .
i think it 's going to come from the children who are growing up now that are n't stuck with all of the stuff that we remember from the past .
they 're going to do it their way , using the tools that we 've created .
the same with students or highly creative people , writers and people like that .
as far as colleges go , there 's about 350 colleges around the world teaching video game courses .
that means there 's literally thousands of new ideas .
some of the ideas are really dreadful and some of them are great .
there 's nothing worse than having to listen to someone try and pitch you a really bad video game idea .
chris anderson : you 're off , you 're off . that 's it .
he 's out of time .
dp : i 've just got a little tiny bit more if you 'll indulge me .
ca : go ahead . i 'm going to stay right here though .
dp : this is just a cool shot , because this is students coming to school after class .
the school is closed ; they 're coming back at midnight because they want to pitch their video game ideas .
i 'm sitting at the front of the class , and they 're actually pitching their ideas .
so it 's hard to get students to come back to class , but it is possible .
this is my daughter , her name 's emma , she 's 17 months old .
and i 've been asking myself , what is emma going to experience in the video game world ?
and as i 've shown here , we have the audience .
she 's never going to know a world where you ca n't press a button and have millions of people ready to play .
you know , we have the technology .
she 's never going to know a world where the graphics just are n't stunning and really immersive .
and as the student video showed , we can impact and move .
she 's never going to know a world where video games are n't incredibly emotional and will probably make her cry .
i just hope she likes video games .
so , my closing thought . games on the surface seem simple entertainment , but for those that like to look a little deeper , the new paradigm of video games could open entirely new frontiers to creative minds that like to think big .
where better to challenge those minds than here at ted ?
thank you .
chris anderson : david perry . that was awesome .
