this is a guy named bob mckim .
he was a creativity researcher in the '60s and '70s , and also led the stanford design program .
and in fact , my friend and ideo founder , david kelley , who 's out there somewhere , studied under him at stanford .
and he liked to do an exercise with his students where he got them to take a piece of paper and draw the person who sat next to them , their neighbor , very quickly , just as quickly as they could . and in fact , we 're going to do that exercise right now . you all have a piece of cardboard and a piece of paper . it 's actually got a bunch of circles on it . i need you to turn that piece of paper over ; you should find that it 's blank on the other side . and there should be a pencil . and i want you to pick somebody that 's seated next to you , and when i say , go , you 've got 30 seconds to draw your neighbor , ok ?
so , everybody ready ? ok . off you go .
you 've got 30 seconds , you 'd better be fast .
come on : those masterpieces ... ok ? stop . all right , now .
yes , lot 's of laughter . yeah , exactly .
lots of laughter , quite a bit of embarrassment .
am i hearing a few " sorry 's " ? i think i 'm hearing a few sorry 's .
yup , yup , i think i probably am. and that 's exactly what happens every time , every time you do this with adults .
mckim found this every time he did it with his students . he got exactly the same response : lots and lots of sorry 's .
and he would point this out as evidence that we fear the judgment of our peers , and that we 're embarrassed about showing our ideas to people we think of as our peers , to those around us . and this fear is what causes us to be conservative in our thinking .
so we might have a wild idea , but we 're afraid to share it with anybody else . ok , so if you try the same exercise with kids , they have no embarrassment at all . they just quite happily show their masterpiece to whoever wants to look at it . but as they learn to become adults , they become much more sensitive to the opinions of others , and they lose that freedom and they do start to become embarrassed . and in studies of kids playing , it 's been shown time after time that kids who feel secure , who are in a kind of trusted environment -- they 're the ones that feel most free to play . and if you 're starting a design firm , let 's say , then you probably also want to create a place where people have the same kind of security . where they have the same kind of security to take risks . maybe have the same kind of security to play .
before founding ideo , david said that what he wanted to do was to form a company where all the employees are my best friends .
now , that was n't just self - indulgence .
he knew that friendship is a short cut to play .
and he knew that it gives us a sense of trust , and it allows us then to take the kind of creative risks that we need to take as designers .
and so , that decision to work with his friends -- now he has 550 of them -- was what got ideo started .
and our studios , like , i think , many creative workplaces today , are designed to help people feel relaxed :
familiar with their surroundings , comfortable with the people that they 're working with .
it takes more than decor , but i think we 've all seen that creative companies do often have symbols in the workplace that remind people to be playful , and that it 's a permissive environment .
so , whether it 's this microbus meeting room that we have in one our buildings at ideo ; or at pixar , where the animators work in wooden huts and decorated caves ;
or at the googleplex , where it 's famous for its [ beach ] volleyball courts , and even this massive dinosaur skeleton with pink flamingos on it . do n't know the reason for the pink flamingos , but anyway , they 're there in the garden .
or even in the swiss office of google , which perhaps has the most wacky ideas of all . and my theory is , that 's so the swiss can prove to their californian colleagues that they 're not boring .
so they have the slide , and they even have a fireman 's pole .
do n't know what they do with that , but they have one .
so all of these places have these symbols .
now , our big symbol at ideo is actually not so much the place , it 's a thing .
and it 's actually something that we invented a few years ago , or created a few years ago .
it 's a toy ; it 's called a " finger blaster . " and i forgot to bring one up with me .
so if somebody can reach under the chair that 's next to them , you 'll find something taped underneath it . that 's great . if you could pass it up . thanks , david , i appreciate it .
so this is a finger blaster , and you will find that every one of you has got one taped under your chair .
and i 'm going to run a little experiment . another little experiment .
but before we start , i need just to put these on . thank you . all right .
now , what i 'm going to do is , i 'm going to see how -- i ca n't see out of these , ok .
i 'm going to see how many of you at the back of the room can actually get those things onto the stage .
so the way they work is , you know , you just put your finger in the thing , pull them back , and off you go .
so , do n't look backwards . that 's my only recommendation here .
i want to see how many of you can get these things on the stage .
so come on ! there we go , there we go . thank you . thank you . oh .
i have another idea . i wanted to -- there we go .
there we go .
thank you , thank you , thank you .
not bad , not bad . no serious injuries so far .
well , they 're still coming in from the back there ; they 're still coming in .
some of you have n't fired them yet .
can you not figure out how to do it , or something ?
it 's not that hard . most of your kids figure out how to do this in the first 10 seconds , when they pick it up .
all right . this is pretty good ; this is pretty good . okay , all right . let 's -- i suppose we 'd better ...
i 'd better clear these up out of the way ; otherwise , i 'm going to trip over them . all right . so the rest of you can save them for when i say something particularly boring , and then you can fire at me .
all right . i think i 'm going to take these off now , because i ca n't see a damn thing when i 've -- all right , ok .
so , ah , that was fun .
all right , good .
so , ok , so why ?
so we have the finger blasters . other people have dinosaurs , you know . why do we have them ? well , as i said , we have them because we think maybe playfulness is important . but why is it important ?
we use it in a pretty pragmatic way , to be honest . we think playfulness helps us get to better creative solutions . helps us do our jobs better , and helps us feel better when we do them .
now , an adult encountering a new situation -- when we encounter a new situation we have a tendency to want to categorize it just as quickly as we can , you know .
and there 's a reason for that : we want to settle on an answer .
life 's complicated ; we want to figure out what 's going on around us very quickly .
i suspect , actually , that the evolutionary biologists probably have lots of reasons [ for ] why we want to categorize new things very , very quickly .
one of them might be , you know , when we see this funny stripy thing : is that a tiger just about to jump out and kill us ?
or is it just some weird shadows on the tree ?
we need to figure that out pretty fast .
well , at least , we did once .
most of us do n't need to anymore , i suppose .
this is some aluminum foil , right ? you use it in the kitchen .
that 's what it is , is n't it ? of course it is , of course it is .
well , not necessarily . kids are more engaged with open possibilities . now , they 'll certainly -- when they come across something new , they 'll certainly ask , " what is it ? "
of course they will . but they 'll also ask , " what can i do with it ? "
and you know , the more creative of them might get to a really interesting example .
and this openness is the beginning of exploratory play .
any parents of young kids in the audience ? there must be some .
yeah , thought so . so we 've all seen it , have n't we ?
we 've all told stories about how , on christmas morning , our kids end up playing with the boxes far more than they play with the toys that are inside them .
and you know , from an exploration perspective , this behavior makes complete sense .
because you can do a lot more with boxes than you can do with a toy .
even one like , say , tickle me elmo -- which , despite its ingenuity , really only does one thing , whereas boxes offer an infinite number of choices .
so again , this is another one of those playful activities that , as we get older , we tend to forget and we have to relearn .
so another one of bob mckim 's favorite exercises is called the " 30 circles test . "
so we 're back to work . you guys are going to get back to work again .
turn that piece of paper that you did the sketch on back over , and you 'll find those 30 circles printed on the piece of paper .
so it should look like this . you should be looking at something like this .
so what i 'm going to do is , i 'm going to give you minute , and i want you to adapt as many of those circles as you can into objects of some form .
so for example , you could turn one into a football , or another one into a sun. all i 'm interested in is quantity .
i want you to do as many of them as you can , in the minute that i 'm just about to give you .
so , everybody ready ? ok ? off you go .
okay . put down your pencils , as they say .
so , who got more than five circles figured out ?
hopefully everybody ? more than 10 ?
keep your hands up if you did 10 .
15 ? 20 ? anybody get all 30 ?
no ? oh ! somebody did . fantastic .
did anybody to a variation on a theme ? like a smiley face ?
happy face ? sad face ? sleepy face ? anybody do that ?
anybody use my examples ? the sun and the football ?
great . cool . so i was really interested in quantity .
i was n't actually very interested in whether they were all different .
i just wanted you to fill in as many circles as possible .
and one of the things we tend to do as adults , again , is we edit things .
we stop ourselves from doing things .
we self - edit as we 're having ideas .
and in some cases , our desire to be original is actually a form of editing .
and that actually is n't necessarily really playful .
so that ability just to go for it and explore lots of things , even if they do n't seem that different from each other , is actually something that kids do well , and it is a form of play .
so now , bob mckim did another version of this test in a rather famous experiment that was done in the 1960s .
anybody know what this is ? it 's the peyote cactus .
it 's the plant from which you can create mescaline , one of the psychedelic drugs . for those of you around in the '60s , you probably know it well .
mckim published a paper in 1966 , describing an experiment
that he and his colleagues conducted to test the effects of psychedelic drugs on creativity .
so he picked 27 professionals -- they were engineers , physicists , mathematicians , architects , furniture designers even , artists --
and he asked them to come along one evening , and to bring a problem with them that they were working on .
he gave each of them some mescaline , and had them listen to some nice , relaxing music for a while .
and then he did what 's called the purdue creativity test .
you might know it as , " how many uses can you find for a paper clip ? "
it 's basically the same thing as the 30 circles thing that i just had you do .
now , actually , he gave the test before the drugs and after the drugs , to see what the difference was in people 's facility and speed with coming up with ideas .
and then he asked them to go away and work on those problems that they 'd brought .
and they 'd come up with a bunch of interesting solutions -- and actually , quite valid solutions -- to the things that they 'd been working on .
and so , some of the things that they figured out , some of these individuals figured out ;
in one case , a new commercial building and designs for houses that were accepted by clients ;
a design of a solar space probe experiment ;
a redesign of the linear electron accelerator ; an engineering improvement to a magnetic tape recorder --
you can tell this is a while ago ;
the completion of a line of furniture ; and even a new conceptual model of the photon .
so it was a pretty successful evening . in fact , maybe this experiment was the reason that silicon valley got off to its great start with innovation .
we do n't know , but it may be .
we need to ask some of the ceos whether they were involved in this mescaline experiment .
but really , it was n't the drugs that were important ; it was this idea that what the drugs did would help shock people out of their normal way of thinking ,
and getting them to forget the adult behaviors that were getting in the way of their ideas .
but it 's hard to break our habits , our adult habits .
at ideo we have brainstorming rules written on the walls .
edicts like , " defer judgment , " or " go for quantity . "
and somehow that seems wrong .
i mean , can you have rules about creativity ?
well , it sort of turns out that we need rules to help us break the old rules and norms that otherwise we might bring to the creative process .
and we 've certainly learnt that over time , you get much better brainstorming , much more creative outcomes when everybody does play by the rules .
now , of course , many designers , many individual designers , achieve this is in a much more organic way .
i think the eameses are wonderful examples of experimentation .
and they experimented with plywood for many years without necessarily having one single goal in mind .
they were exploring following what was interesting to them .
they went from designing splints for wounded soldiers coming out of world war ii and the korean war , i think ,
and from this experiment they moved on to chairs .
through constant experimentation with materials , they developed a wide range of iconic solutions that we know today , eventually resulting in , of course , the legendary lounge chair .
now , if the eameses had stopped with that first great solution , then we would n't be the beneficiaries of so many wonderful designs today .
and of course , they used experimentation in all aspects of their work ,
from films to buildings , from games to graphics .
so , they 're great examples , i think , of exploration and experimentation in design .
now , while the eameses were exploring those possibilities , they were also exploring physical objects .
and they were doing that through building prototypes .
and building is the next of the behaviors that i thought i 'd talk about .
so the average western first - grader spends as much as 50 percent of their play time taking part in what 's called " construction play . "
construction play -- it 's playful , obviously , but also a powerful way to learn .
when play is about building a tower out of blocks , the kid begins to learn a lot about towers .
and as they repeatedly knock it down and start again , learning is happening as a sort of by - product of play .
it 's classically learning by doing .
now , david kelley calls this behavior , when it 's carried out by designers , " thinking with your hands . "
and it typically involves making multiple , low - resolution prototypes very quickly ,
often by bringing lots of found elements together in order to get to a solution .
on one of his earliest projects , the team was kind of stuck , and they came up with a mechanism by hacking together a prototype made from a roll - on deodorant . now , that became the first commercial computer mouse for the apple lisa and the macintosh .
so , they learned their way to that by building prototypes .
another example is a group of designers who were working on a surgical instrument with some surgeons .
they were meeting with them ; they were talking to the surgeons about what it was they needed with this device .
and one of the designers ran out of the room and grabbed a white board marker and a film canister -- which is now becoming a very precious prototyping medium -- and a clothespin . he taped them all together , ran back into the room and said , " you mean , something like this ? "
and the surgeons grabbed hold of it and said , well , i want to hold it like this , or like that .
and all of a sudden a productive conversation was happening about design around a tangible object .
and in the end it turned into a real device .
and so this behavior is all about quickly getting something into the real world , and having your thinking advanced as a result .
at ideo there 's a kind of a back - to - preschool feel sometimes about the environment .
the prototyping carts , filled with colored paper and play - doh and glue sticks and stuff -- i mean , they do have a bit of a kindergarten feel to them .
but the important idea is that everything 's at hand , everything 's around .
so when designers are working on ideas , they can start building stuff whenever they want .
they do n't necessarily even have to go into some kind of formal workshop to do it .
and we think that 's pretty important .
and then the sad thing is , although preschools are full of this kind of stuff , as kids go through the school system it all gets taken away .
they lose this stuff that facilitates this sort of playful and building mode of thinking .
and of course , by the time you get to the average workplace , maybe the best construction tool we have might be the post - it notes . it 's pretty barren .
but by giving project teams and the clients who they 're working with permission to think with their hands , quite complex ideas can spring into life and go right through to execution much more easily .
this is a nurse using a very simple -- as you can see -- plasticine prototype , explaining what she wants out of a portable information system to a team of technologists and designers that are working with her in a hospital .
and just having this very simple prototype allows her to talk about what she wants in a much more powerful way .
and of course , by building quick prototypes , we can get out and test our ideas with consumers and users much more quickly than if we 're trying to describe them through words .
but what about designing something that is n't physical ?
something like a service or an experience ?
something that exists as a series of interactions over time ?
instead of building play , this can be approached with role - play .
so , if you 're designing an interaction between two people -- such as , i do n't know -- ordering food at a fast food joint or something , you need to be able to imagine how that experience might feel over a period of time .
and i think the best way to achieve that , and get a feeling for any flaws in your design , is to act it out .
so we do quite a lot of work at ideo trying to convince our clients of this .
they can be a little skeptical ; i 'll come back to that .
but a place , i think , where the effort is really worthwhile is where people are wrestling with quite serious problems --
things like education or security or finance or health .
and this is another example in a healthcare environment of some doctors and some nurses and designers acting out a service scenario around patient care .
but you know , many adults are pretty reluctant to engage with role - play .
some of it 's embarrassment and some of it is because they just do n't believe that what emerges is necessarily valid .
they dismiss an interesting interaction by saying , you know , " that 's just happening because they 're acting it out . "
research into kids ' behavior actually suggests that it 's worth taking role - playing seriously .
because when children play a role , they actually follow social scripts quite closely that they 've learnt from us as adults .
if one kid plays " store , " and another one 's playing " house , " then the whole kind of play falls down .
so they get used to quite quickly to understanding the rules for social interactions , and are actually quite quick to point out when they 're broken .
so when , as adults , we role - play , then we have a huge set of these scripts already internalized .
we 've gone through lots of experiences in life ,
and they provide a strong intuition as to whether an interaction is going to work .
so we 're very good , when acting out a solution , at spotting whether something lacks authenticity .
so role - play is actually , i think , quite valuable when it comes to thinking about experiences .
another way for us , as designers , to explore role - play is to put ourselves through an experience which we 're designing for , and project ourselves into an experience .
so here are some designers who are trying to understand what it might feel like to sleep in a confined space on an airplane .
and so they grabbed some very simple materials , you can see , and did this role - play , this kind of very crude role - play , just to get a sense of what it would be like for passengers if they were stuck in quite small places on airplanes .
this is one of our designers , kristian simsarian , and he 's putting himself through the experience of being an er patient .
now , this is a real hospital , in a real emergency room .
one of the reasons he chose to take this rather large video camera with him was because he did n't want the doctors and nurses thinking he was actually sick , and sticking something into him that he was going to regret later .
so anyhow , he went there with his video camera , and it 's kind of interesting to see what he brought back .
because when we looked at the video when he got back , we saw 20 minutes of this .
and also , the amazing thing about this video -- as soon as you see it you immediately project yourself into that experience .
and you know what it feels like : all of that uncertainty while you 're left out in the hallway while the docs are dealing with some more urgent case in one of the emergency rooms , wondering what the heck 's going on .
and so this notion of using role - play -- or in this case , living through the experience as a way of creating empathy -- particularly when you use video , is really powerful .
or another one of our designers , altay sendil : he 's here having his chest waxed , not because he 's very vain , although actually he is -- no , i 'm kidding --
but in order to empathize with the pain that chronic care patients go through when they 're having dressings removed .
and so sometimes these analogous experiences , analogous role - play , can also be quite valuable .
so when a kid dresses up as a firefighter , you know , he 's beginning to try on that identity .
he wants to know what it feels like to be a firefighter .
we 're doing the same thing as designers .
we 're trying on these experiences .
and so the idea of role - play is both as an empathy tool , as well as a tool for prototyping experiences .
and you know , we kind of admire people who do this at ideo anyway .
not just because they lead to insights about the experience , but also because of their willingness to explore and their ability to unselfconsciously surrender themselves to the experience .
in short , we admire their willingness to play .
playful exploration , playful building and role - play :
those are some of the ways that designers use play in their work .
and so far , i admit , this might feel like it 's a message just to go out and play like a kid .
and to certain extent it is , but i want to stress a couple of points .
the first thing to remember is that play is not anarchy .
play has rules , especially when it 's group play .
when kids play tea party , or they play cops and robbers , they 're following a script that they 've agreed to .
and it 's this code negotiation that leads to productive play .
so , remember the sketching task we did at the beginning ?
the kind of little face , the portrait you did ?
well , imagine if you did the same task with friends while you were drinking in a pub .
but everybody agreed to play a game where the worst sketch artist bought the next round of drinks .
that framework of rules would have turned an embarrassing , difficult situation into a fun game .
as a result , we 'd all feel perfectly secure and have a good time -- but because we all understood the rules and we agreed on them together .
but there are n't just rules about how to play ; there are rules about when to play .
kids do n't play all the time , obviously .
they transition in and out of it ,
and good teachers spend a lot of time thinking about how to move kids through these experiences .
as designers , we need to be able to transition in and out of play also .
and if we 're running design studios we need to be able to figure out , how can we transition designers through these different experiences ?
i think this is particularly true if we think about the sort of --
i think what 's very different about design is that we go through these two very distinctive modes of operation .
we go through a sort of generative mode , where we 're exploring many ideas ;
and then we come back together again , and come back looking for that solution , and developing that solution .
i think they 're two quite different modes :
divergence and convergence .
and i think it 's probably in the divergent mode that we most need playfulness .
perhaps in convergent mode we need to be more serious .
and so being able to move between those modes is really quite important . so , it 's where there 's a more nuanced version view of play , i think , is required .
because it 's very easy to fall into the trap that these states are absolute .
you 're either playful or you 're serious , and you ca n't be both .
but that 's not really true : you can be a serious professional adult and , at times , be playful .
it 's not an either / or ; it 's an " and . "
you can be serious and play .
so to sum it up , we need trust to play , and we need trust to be creative . so , there 's a connection .
and there are a series of behaviors that we 've learnt as kids , and that turn out to be quite useful to us as designers .
they include exploration , which is about going for quantity ;
building , and thinking with your hands ;
and role - play , where acting it out helps us both to have more empathy for the situations in which we 're designing , and to create services and experiences that are seamless and authentic .
thank you very much .
