♫ jill sobule : at a conference in monterey by the big , big jellyfish tank , ♫ ♫ i first saw you and i got so shy . ♫ ♫ you see , i was a little paranoid ' cause i might have been high . ♫ ♫ and i had n't done that in ages and i wo n't do that again . ♫ ♫ but that 's another story . ♫ ♫ loved you forever and i 've been a big fan , ♫ ♫ the one - woman shows , i even rented " pat . " ♫ ♫ i got enough nerve to come up to you , ♫ ♫ but little did i know one year later we 'd be doing this show . ♫ ♫ i sing . julia sweeney : i tell stories . together : the jill and julia show . ♫ ♫ sobule : sometimes it works . sweeney : sometimes it does n't . ♫ ♫ together : the jill and julia show . ♫ ♫ sweeney : at a conference in monterey next to the big , big jellyfish tank , ♫ ♫ i first saw you and i was n't so shy . ♫ i made a beeline for you and told you what a huge fan i was ever since i was writing that pilot for fox , and wendy and i wanted you to do the theme song .
and then the pilot did n't go and i was so sad , but i kept remaining a fan of yours .
and then when i went through that big , horrible breakup with carl and i could n't get off the couch , i listened to your song , ♫ " now that i do n't have you , " ♫ over and over and over and over again .
and i ca n't believe you 're here and that i 'm meeting you here at ted .
and also , i ca n't believe that we 're eating sushi in front of the fish tank , which , personally , i think is really inappropriate .
and little did i know that one year later ... ♫ we 'd be doing this show . ♫ ♫ sobule : i sing . sweeney : i tell stories . together : the jill and julia show . ♫ sobule : hey , they asked us back ! sweeney : can you stand it ? !
♫ together : the jill and julia , the jill and julia , the jill and julia show . ♫ ♫ sobule : why are all our heroes so imperfect ? ♫ ♫ why do they always bring me down ? ♫ ♫ why are all our heroes so imperfect ? ♫ ♫ statue in the park has lost his crown . ♫ ♫ william faulkner , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : mmm .
♫ dorothy parker , mean , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : i know .
♫ and that guy , " seven years in tibet , " turned out to be a nazi . ♫ sweeney : yeah .
♫ founding fathers all had slaves . ♫ sweeney : i know .
♫ the explorers slaughtered the braves . ♫ sweeney : horribly .
♫ sobule : the old testament god can be so petty . ♫ sweeney : do n't get me started on that .
♫ sobule : paul mccartney , jealous of john , even more so now that he 's gone . ♫ ♫ dylan was so mean to donovan in that movie . ♫ ♫ pablo picasso , cruel to his wives . ♫ sweeney : horrible .
♫ sobule : my favorite poets took their own lives . ♫ ♫ orson welles peaked at twenty - five , below before our eyes . ♫ ♫ and he sold bad wine . ♫ ♫ together : why are all our heroes so imperfect ? yeah ♫ ♫ why do they always bring me down ? ♫ ♫ sobule : heard babe ruth was full of malice . ♫ sweeney : oh .
♫ lewis carroll i 'm sure did alice . ♫ sweeney : what ? !
♫ plato in the cave with those very young boys . ♫ sweeney : ooh ...
♫ sobule : hillary supported the war . ♫ ♫ sweeney : even thomas friedman supported the war . ♫ ♫ sobule : colin powell turned out to be ... together : ... such a pussy . ♫ ♫ sobule : william faulkner , drunk and depressed , ♫ ♫ tennessee williams , drunk and depressed . ♫ sweeney : yeah .
♫ sobule : take it , julia . ♫ sweeney : okay . oprah was never necessarily a big hero of mine .
i mean , i watch oprah mostly when i 'm home in spokane visiting my mother . and to my mother , oprah is a greater moral authority than the pope , which is actually saying something because she 's a devout catholic .
anyway , i like oprah -- i like her girlfriendy - ness , i like her weight issues , i like how she 's transformed talk television , i like how she 's brought reading back to america -- but there was something that happened the last two weeks that was ... i call it the soon - yi moment : it is the moment when i cannot continue supporting someone .
and that was that she did two entire shows promoting that movie " the secret . "
do you guys know about that movie " the secret " ?
it makes " what the bleep do we know " seem like a doctoral dissertation from harvard on quantum mechanics -- that 's how bad it is .
it makes " the davinci code " seem like " war and peace . "
that movie is so horrible . it promotes such awful pseudoscience .
and the basic idea is that there 's this law of attraction , and your thoughts have this vibrating energy that goes out into the universe and then you attract good things to happen to you .
on a scientific basis , it 's more than just " power of positive thinking " -- it has a horrible , horrible dark side . like if you get ill , it 's because you 've just been thinking negative thoughts .
yeah , stuff like that was in the movie and she 's promoting it .
and all i 'm saying is that i really wish that murray gell - mann would go on oprah and just explain to her that the law of attraction is , in fact , not a law .
so that 's what i have to say .
