i do n't speak english .
i start speaking english , learning english , about a year ago .
i speak french and i grew up with french , so my english is franglais .
i 'm born in the western congo , in an area around here , and then went to university in kisangani .
and after i finished , i went to this area , the ituri forest .
but what i 've been doing -- when i was about 14 , i grew in my uncle 's house .
and my father was a soldier , and my uncle was a fisherman and also a poacher .
what i 've been doing from 14 to 17 was , i was assisting them collecting ivory tusk , meat and whatever they were killing , poaching , hunting in the forest , bring it in the main city to get access to the market .
but finally , i got myself involved .
around 17 to 20 years , i became , myself , a poacher .
and i wanted to do it , because -- i believed -- to continue my studies .
i wanted to go to university , but my father was poor , my uncle even .
so , i did it .
and for three to four years , i went to university .
for three times , i applied to biomedical science , to be a doctor .
i did n't succeed .
i was having my inscriptions , my admission to biology .
and i said , " no way , i 'm not doing it .
my family 's poor , my area do n't have better health care .
i want to be a doctor to serve them . "
three times , that means three years , and i start getting old .
i say , " oh , no , i continue . "
so , i did tropical ecology and plant botany .
when i finished , i went to the ituri forest for my internship .
it 's where i really getting passion with what i 'm doing right up to now -- i 'm standing in front of you -- doing botany and wildlife conservation .
that time the ituri forest was created as a forest reserve with some animals and also plants .
and the training center there was built around the scientific congolese staff and some american scientists also .
so , the okapi faunal reserve protects number -- i think that is the largest number of elephants we have right now in protected areas in congo .
it has also chimpanzees .
and it has been named okapi faunal reserve because of this beautiful creature .
that is a forest giraffe .
i think you guys know it quite well .
here we have savanna giraffes , but through evolution we have this forest giraffe that lives only in congo .
it has also some beautiful primates .
thirteen species -- highest diversity we can find in one single area in africa .
and it has the ituri forest itself -- about 1,300 species of plants , so far known .
i joined the wildlife conservation society , working there , in 1995 , but i started working with them as a student in 1991 .
i was appointed as a teaching assistant at my university because i accomplished with honor .
but i did n't like the way -- the instruction i got was very poor .
and i wanted to be formed to a training center and a research center .
with the end of the dictatorship regime of mobutu sese seko , that most of you know , life became very , very difficult .
and the work we have been doing was completely difficult to do and to achieve it .
when kabila started his movement to liberate congo , so mobutu soldiers started moving and retreated .
so they started fleeing from the east to the west .
and the okapi faunal reserve is there , so there was a road from goma , somewhere here , and coming like this .
so they might go through , pass through the okapi faunal reserve .
congo has five of the world 's richest sites of protected area , and the okapi faunal reserve is one of them .
so soldier was fleeing in the okapi faunal reserve .
on their way , they looted everything .
torture , wars -- oh , my god , you ca n't believe .
every person was looking his way -- where to go , we do n't know .
and it was for us , the young , the first time really we hear the language of war , of guns .
and even people who faced the rebellion of 1963 , after our independence , they did n't believe what was happening .
they were killing people . they were doing whatever they want because they have power .
who have been doing that ?
young children . child soldiers .
you ca n't ask him how old he is because he has guns .
but i was from the west , working in the east .
i even [ at ] that time was not speaking swahili .
and when they came , they looted everything .
you ca n't speak lingala because lingala was from mobutu , and everyone speaking lingala is soldier .
and i was from the same area to him .
all my friends said , we are leaving because we are a target .
but i 'm not going to the east , because i do n't know swahili .
i stay . if i go , i will be killed .
i ca n't go back to my area -- it 's more than 1,000 kilometers [ away ] .
i stayed after they looted everything .
we have been doing research on botany , and we have a small herbarium of 4,500 sheets of plants .
we cut , we dry and we packed them , we mounted them on a folder .
purpose : so that we start them for agriculture , for medicine , for whatever , and for science , for the study of the flora and the change of the forest .
that is people moving around , that 's even pygmies .
and this is a bright guy , hard - working person , and pygmy .
i 've been working with him about 10 years .
and with soldiers , they went to the forest for poaching elephants .
because he 's pygmy , he knows how to track elephants in the forest .
he has been attacked by a leopard and they abandon him in the forest .
they came to told me , i have to save him .
and what i did , i gave him just antibiotics that we care for tuberculosis .
and fortunately , i saved his life .
and that was the language of the war .
everywhere there has been constant extraction of mineral , killing animals , the logging timbers and so on .
and what of important things -- i think all of you here have a cell phone .
that mineral has killed a lot : five millions of congolese have gone because of this colombo - tantalite -- they call it coltan -- that they use it to make cell phones and it has been in that area , all over in congo . extraction , and good , big business of the war .
and what i did for the first war , after we have lost everything , i have to save something , even myself , my life and life of the staff .
i buried some of our new vehicle engines , i buried it to save it .
and some of equipment went with them , on the top of the canopy , to save it .
he 's not collecting plants , he 's going to save our equipment on the canopy .
and with the material that 's left -- because they wanted to destroy it , to burn it , they did n't understand it , they did n't go to school -- i packed it .
and that is me , going to , hurrying to uganda , to try to save that 4,000 material , with people carrying them on the bikes , bicycles .
and after that , we succeeded .
i housed that 4,000 material at the herbarium of makerere university .
and after the war , i have been able to bring it back home , so that we continue our studies .
the second war came while we did n't expect it .
with friends , we had been sitting and watching match football , and having some good music with worldspace radio , when it started , i think .
so , it was so bad .
we heard that now from the east again the war started , and it 's going fast .
this time i think kabila will go in place of , as he did with mobutu .
and the reserve was a target to the rebels .
three different movements and two militia acting in the same area and competing for natural resources .
and there was no way to work .
they destroy everything .
poaching -- oh , no way .
and that 's the powerful men . we have to meet and to talk to them .
what 's the regulation of the reserve and what is the regulation of the parks ?
and they ca n't do what they are doing .
so we went to meet them .
that is coltan extraction , gold mining .
so , we started talking with them , convincing them that we are in a protected area .
there are regulations that it 's prohibited to do logging , mining and poaching , specifically .
but they said , " you guys , you think that soldiers who are dying are not important , and your animals you are protecting are most important .
we do n't think so .
we have to do it , because to let our movement advance . "
i say , " no way , you are not going to do it here . "
we started talking with them and i was negotiating .
tried to protect our equipment , tried to protect our staff and the villages of about 1,500 people .
and we continued .
but i was doing that , negotiating with them .
sometimes we are having meeting and they are talking with jean - pierre bemba , with mbusa nyamwisi , with kabila , and i 'm there .
sometimes , they talk to my own language , that is , lingala .
i hear it and what strategy they are doing , what they are planning .
sometimes , they are having a helicopter to supply them with ammunition and so on .
they used me to carry that , and i was doing counting , what comes from where , and where , and where .
i had only this equipment -- my satellite phone , my computer and a plastic solar panel -- that i hide it in the forest .
and every time , daily , after we have meeting , what compromise we have , whatever , i go , i write a short email , send it .
i do n't know how many people i had on my address .
i sent the message : what is going about the progress of the war and what they are planning to do .
they started suspecting that what we do on the morning , and the afternoon , it 's on the news , bbc , rfi .
something might be going on .
and one day , we went for a meeting .
sorry .
one day , we went to meet the chief commander .
he had the same iridium cell phone like me .
and he asked me , " do you know how to use this ? "
i said , " i have never seen it .
i do n't know . "
and i had mine on my pocket .
so , it was a chance that they trusted me a lot .
they did n't -- they was not looking on me .
so i was scared .
and when we finished the meeting , i went to return it in the forest .
and i was sending news , doing whatever , reporting daily to the u.n. , to unesco , to our institution in new york , what have been going .
and for that , they have been having big pressure to leave , to free the area .
because there was no way -- whatever they do , it 's known the same time .
during the first two rebellions , they killed all animals in the zoo .
we have a zoo of 14 okapis , and one of them was pregnant .
and during the war , after a week of heavy war , fighting in the area , we succeeded : we had the first okapi .
this is the only trouser and shirt remind me of this .
this is not local population , this is rebels .
they are now happy sending the news that they have protected the okapi with the war , because we sent the news that they are killing and poaching everywhere .
after a week , we celebrated the birthday of that okapi , they killed an elephant , just 50 meters to the area where the zoo , where okapi was born .
and i was mad .
i oppose it -- that they are now going to dissect it , until i do my report and then i see the chief commander .
and i succeeded .
the elephant just decayed and they just got the tusks .
what we are doing after that -- that was the situation of the war -- we have to rebuild .
i had some money . i was paid 150 dollars .
i devoted half of it to rebuild the herbarium , because we did n't have good infrastructure to start plants .
wildlife conservation society more dealing with plants .
i started this with 70 dollars , and start fundraising money to where i 've been going .
i had opportunity to go all over , where herbarium for my african material is .
and they supported me a bit , and i built this .
now , it 's doing work to train young congolese .
and also , what one of the speciality we are doing , my design is tracking the global warming effect on biodiversity , and what the impacts of the ituri forest is playing to uptake carbon .
this is one of the studies we are doing on a 40 - hectare plot , where we have tagged trees and lianas from one centimeters , and we are tracking them .
we have now data of about 15 years , to see how that forest is contributing to the carbon reductions .
and that is -- i think it 's difficult for me .
this is a very embarrassing talk , i know .
i do n't know where to start , where to finish it .
when i was thinking to come here , what best title i wanted to say to my talk , i did n't find this .
but now i think that i would have titled it , " the language of guns . "
where are you people ?
now we are talking about reconstitution , rebuild africa .
but is gun industries a tool to rebuild , or is it a game ?
i think we see the war like a game -- like soccer , football .
everybody is happy , but see what it 's doing , see what is going in darfur .
now we say , oh , my god .
see what the wars in rwanda .
that 's because of the language of guns .
i do n't think that someone may blame google , because it 's doing the right things , even if people like al-qaeda are using google to connect between them .
but it 's serving millions for the best .
but what is doing with gun industries ?
thank you .
chris anderson : thank you , thank you .
just wait over there .
it 's an amazing story .
i suspect a lot of people here have the same question i have .
how can we help you ?
corneille ewango : that 's really embarrassing questions .
i think that now i feel nervous .
and i think , helping us , people are acting sometimes by ignorance .
i did it myself .
if i know when i was young , that [ by ] killing an elephant , i 'm destroying biodiversity , i would not have done it .
many , many of you have seen the talents of africans , but there are few who are going to school .
many are dying because of all those kind of pandemics , hiv , malaria , poverty , not going to school .
what you can assist us , it 's by building capacities .
how many have got opportunity like me to go to u.s. , do a master 's ?
and go -- now , i 'm in the netherlands to do a ph.d.
but many of them are just here , because they do n't have money .
and they ca n't go even to university .
they ca n't even attain the bachelor 's degree .
building capacities for the young generation is going to make a better generation and a better future tomorrow for africa .
ca : thank you , thank you .
