i am known best for human - powered flight , but that was just one thing that got me going in the sort of things that i 'm working in now .
as a youngster , i was very interested in model airplanes , ornithopters , autogyros , helicopters , gliders , power planes , indoor models , outdoor models , everything , which i just thought was a lot of fun , and wondered why most other people did n't share my same enthusiasm with them .
and then , navy pilot training , and , after college , i got into sailplane flying , power plane flying , and considered the sailplanes as a sort of hobby and fun , but got tangled up with some great professor types , who convinced me and everybody else in the field that this was a good way to get into really deep science .
while this was all going on , i was in the field of weather modification , although getting a ph.d. in aeronautics .
the weather modification subject was getting started , and as a graduate student , i could go around to the various talks that were being given , on a hitchhiker ride to the east coast , and so on . and everybody would talk to me , but all the professionals in the field hated each other , and they would n't communicate . and as a result , i got the absolutely unique background in that field , and started a company , which did more research in weather modification than anybody , and there are a lot of things that i just ca n't go into .
but then , 1971 started aerovironment , with no employees -- then one or two , three , and sort of fumbled along on trying to get interesting projects .
we had airdynamisis , who , like i , did not want to work for aerospace companies on some big , many year project , and so we did our small projects , and the company slowly grew .
the thing that is exciting was , in 1976 , i suddenly got interested in the human - powered airplane because i 'd made a made a loan to a friend of 100,000 dollars , or i guaranteed the money at the bank .
he needed them -- he needed the money for starting a company .
the company did not succeed , and he could n't pay the money back , and i was the guarantor of the note . so , i had a $ 100,000 debt , and i noticed that the kramer prize for human - powered flight , which had then been around for -- -- 17 years at the time , was 50,000 pounds , which , at the exchange rate , was just about 100,000 dollars .
so suddenly , i was interested in human - powered flight -- -- and did not -- the way i approached it , first , thinking about ways to make the planes , was just like they 'd been doing in england , and not succeeding , and i gave it up . i figured , nah , there is n't any simple , easy way .
but then , got off on a vacation trip , and was studying bird flight , just for the fun of it , and you can watch a bird soaring around in circles , and measure the time , and estimate the bank angle , and immediately , figure out its speed , and the turning radius , and so on , which i could do in the car , as we 're driving along on a vacation trip -- -- with my three sons , young sons , helping me , but ridiculing the whole thing very much .
but that began thinking about how birds went around , and then how airplanes would , how hang gliders would fly , and then other planes , and the idea of the gossamer - condor - type airplane quickly emerged , was so logical , one should have thought of it in the first place , but one did n't . and it was just , keep the weight down -- 70 pounds was all it weighed -- but let the size swell up , like a hang glider , but three times the span , three times the cord .
you 're down to a third of the speed , a third of the power , and a good bicyclist can put out that power , and that worked , and we won the prize a year later .
we did n't -- a lot of flying , a lot of experiments , a lot of things that did n't work , and ones that did work , and the plane kept getting a little better , a little better .
got a good pilot , brian allen , to operate it , and finally , succeeded . but unfortunately , about 65,000 dollars was spent on the project .
and there was only about 30 to help retire the debt .
but fortunately , henry kramer , who put up the prize for -- that was a one - mile flight -- put up a new prize for flying the english channel , 21 miles .
and he thought it would take another 18 years for somebody to win that .
we realized that if you just cleaned up our gossamer condor a little bit , the power to fly would be decreased a little bit , and if you decrease the power required a little , the pilot can fly a much longer period of time .
and brian allen was able , in a miraculous flight , to get the gossamer albatross across the english channel , and we won the 100,000 - pound , 200,000 - dollar prize for that .
and when all expenses were paid , the debt was handled , and everything was fine .
it turned out that giving the planes to the museum was worth much more than the debt , so for five years , six years , i only had to pay one third income tax .
so , there were good economic reasons for the project , but -- -- that 's not , well , the project was done entirely for economic reasons , and we have not been involved in any human - powered flight since then -- -- because the prizes are all over .
but that sure started me thinking about various things , and immediately , we began making a solar - powered plane because we felt solar power was going to be so important for the country and the world , we did n't want the small funding in the government to be decreased , which is what the government was trying to do with it .
and we thought a solar - powered plane would n't really make sense , but you could do it and it would get a lot of publicity for solar power and maybe help that field .
and that project continued , did succeed , and we then got into other projects in aviation and mechanical things and ground devices .
but while this was going on , in 1982 , i got a prize from the lindbergh foundation -- their annual prize -- and i had to prepare a paper on it , which collected all my varied thoughts and varied interests over the years .
this was the one chance that i had to focus on what i , really , was after , and what was important . and to my surprise , i realized the importance of environmental issues , which charles lindbergh devoted the last third of his life to , and preparing that paper did me a lot of good .
i thought back about if i was a space traveler , and came and visited earth every 5,000 years .
and for a few thousand visits , i would see the same thing every time , the little differences in the earth .
but this last time , just coming round , right now , suddenly , there 'd be huge changes in the environment , in the concentration of people , and it was just unbelievable , the amount of -- all the change in it .
i wanted to -- well , one of the biggest changes is , 200 years ago , we began using coal from underground , which has a lot of pollution , and 100 years ago , began getting gasoline from underground , with a lot of pollution . and gasoline consumption , or production , will reach its limit in about ten years , and then go down , and we wonder what 's going to happen with transportation .
i wanted to show the slide -- this slide , i think , is the most important one any of you will see , ever , because -- -- it shows nature versus humans , and goes from 1850 to 2050 .
and so , the year 2000 , you see there .
and this is the weight of all air and land vertebrates .
humans and muskrats and giraffes and birds and so on , are -- the red line goes up . that 's the humans and livestock and pets portion .
the green line goes down . that 's the wild nature portion .
humans , livestock and pets are , now , 98 percent of the total world 's mass of vertebrates on land and air .
and you do n't know what the future will hold , but it 's not going to get a lower percentage .
ten thousand years ago , the humans and livestock and pets were not even one tenth of one percent and would n't even have been visible on such a curve .
now they are 98 percent , and it , i think , shows human domination of the earth .
i give a talk to some remarkable high school students each summer , and ask them , after they 've asked me questions , and i give them a talk and so on . then i ask them questions .
what 's the population of the earth ?
what 's the population of the earth going to be when you 're the age of your parents ?
which i 'd never , really -- they had never , really , thought about but , now , they think about it .
and then , what population of the earth would be an equilibrium that could continue on , and be for 2050 , 2100 , 2150 ?
and they form little groups , all fighting with each other , and when i leave , two hours later , most of them are saying about 2 billion people , and they do n't have any clue about how to get down to 2 billion , nor do i , but i think they 're right and this is a serious problem .
rachel carson was thinking of these , and came out with " silent spring , " way back .
" solar manifesto " by hermann scheer , in germany , claims all energy on earth can be derived , for every country , from solar energy and water , and so on .
you do n't need to dig down for these chemicals , and we can do things much more efficiently .
let 's have the next slide .
so this just summarizes it . " over billions of years , on a unique sphere , chance has painted a thin covering of life -- complex and probable , wonderful and fragile .
suddenly , we humans , a recently arrived species , no longer subject to the checks and balances inherent in nature , have grown in population , technology and intelligence to a position of terrible power . we , now , wield the paintbrush . "
we 're in charge . it 's frightening .
and i do a painting every 20 or 25 years . this is the last one .
and [ it ] shows the earth in a time flag : on the right , in trilobites and dinosaurs and so on ; and over the triangle , we now get to civilization and tv and traffic jams and so on .
i have no idea of what comes next , so i just used robotic and natural cockroaches as the future , as a little warning .
and two weeks after this drawing was done , we actually had our first project contract , at aerovironment , on robotic cockroaches , which was very frightening to me .
well , that 'll be all the slides .
as time went on , we stopped our environmental programs .
we focused more on the really serious energy problems of the future , and we produced products for the company .
and we developed the impact car that general motors made , the ev 1 , out of -- and got the air resources board to have the regulations that stimulated the electric cars , but they 've since come apart .
and we 've done a lot of things , small drone airplanes and so on .
i have a helios . we have the first video .
narrator : with a wingspan of 247 feet , this makes her larger than a boeing 747 .
her designers ' attention to detail and her construction gives helios ' structure the flexibility and strength to deal with the turbulence encountered in the atmosphere .
this enables her to easily ride through the air currents as if she 's sliding along on the ocean waves .
paul maccready : the wings could touch together on top and not break . we think .
narrator : and helios now begins the process of turning her back to the sun , to maximize the power from her solar array .
as the sky gets darker , and the outside air temperatures drop below minus 100 degrees fahrenheit , the most environmentally hostile segment of helios 's journey has gone by without notice , except for being recorded by specially designed data acquisition systems and their associated sensors .
approaching a peak radar altitude of 96,863 feet , at 4:12 p.m. , helios is standing on top of 98 percent of the earth 's atmosphere .
this is more than 10,000 feet higher than the previous world 's altitude record held by the sr - 71 blackbird .
pm : that plane has many purposes , but it 's aimed for communications , and it can fly so slowly that it 'll just stay up at 65,000 feet .
eventually , it will be able to have to stay up day , night , day , night , for six months at a time , acting like the synchronous satellite , but only ten miles above the earth .
let 's have the next video . this shows the other end of the spectrum .
narrator : a tiny airplane , the av pointer serves for surveillance .
in effect a pair of roving eyeglasses , a cutting - edge example of where miniaturization can lead if the operator is remote from the vehicle .
it is convenient to carry , assemble , and launch by hand .
battery - powered , it is silent and rarely noticed .
it sends high - resolution video pictures back to the operator .
with on - board gps , it can navigate autonomously , and it is rugged enough to self - land without damage .
pm : okay , and let 's have the next .
that plane is widely used by the military , now , in all their operations .
let 's have the next video .
alan alda : he 's got it , he 's got it , he 's got it on his head .
we 're going to end our visit with paul maccready 's flying circus by meeting his son , tyler , who , with his two brothers , helped build the gossamer condor , 25 years ago .
tyler maccready : you can chase it , like this , for hours .
aa : when they got bored with their father 's project , they invented an extraordinary little plane of their own .
tm : and i can control it by putting the lift on one side of the wing , or on the other .
aa : they called it their walkalong glider .
i 've never seen anything like that .
how old were you when you invented that ?
tm : oh , 10 , 11 .
tm : 12 , something like that .
pm : and tyler 's here to show you the walkalong .
tm : all right . you all got a couple of these in your gift bags , and one of the first things , the production version seemed to dive a little bit , and so i would just suggest you bend the wing tips up a little bit before you try flying it .
i 'll give you a demonstration of how it works .
the idea is that it soars on the lift over your body , like a seagull soaring on a cliff .
as the wind comes up , it has to go over the cliff , so as you walk through the air , it goes around your body , some has to go over you .
and so you just keep the glider positioned in that up current .
the launch is the difficult part : you 've got to hold it high up , over your head , and you start walking forward , and just let go of it , and you can control it like that .
and then also , like it said in the video , you can turn it left or right just by putting the lift under one wing or another .
so i can do it -- oops , that was going to be a right turn .
okay , this one will be a left turn .
here , but -- -- anyway .
and that 's it , so you can just control it , wherever you want , and it 's just hours of fun . and these are no longer in production , so you have real collector 's items .
and this , we just wanted to show you -- if we can get the video running on this , yeah -- just an example of a little video surveillance .
this was flying around in the party last night , and -- -- you can see how it just can fly around , and you can spy on anybody you want .
and that 's it . i was going to bring an airplane , but i was worried about hitting people in here , so i thought this would be a little bit more gentle .
and that 's it , yeah , just a few inventions .
all right .
