i was speaking to a group of about 300 kids , ages six to eight , at a children 's museum , and i brought with me a bag full of legs , similar to the kinds of things you see up here , and had them laid out on a table for the kids .
and , from my experience , you know , kids are naturally curious about what they do n't know , or do n't understand , or is foreign to them .
they only learn to be frightened of those differences when an adult influences them to behave that way , and maybe censors that natural curiosity , or you know , reins in the question - asking in the hopes of them being polite little kids .
so i just pictured a first grade teacher out in the lobby with these unruly kids , saying , " now , whatever you do , do n't stare at her legs . "
but , of course , that 's the point .
that 's why i was there , i wanted to invite them to look and explore .
so i made a deal with the adults that the kids could come in without any adults for two minutes on their own .
the doors open , the kids descend on this table of legs , and they are poking and prodding , and they 're wiggling toes , and they 're trying to put their full weight on the sprinting leg to see what happens with that .
and i said , " kids , really quickly -- i woke up this morning , i decided i wanted to be able to jump over a house -- nothing too big , two or three stories -- but , if you could think of any animal , any superhero , any cartoon character , anything you can dream up right now , what kind of legs would you build me ? "
and immediately a voice shouted , " kangaroo ! "
" no , no , no ! should be a frog ! "
" no. it should be go go gadget ! "
" no , no , no ! it should be the incredibles . "
and other things that i do n't -- are n't familiar with .
and then , one eight - year - old said , " hey , why would n't you want to fly too ? "
and the whole room , including me , was like , " yeah . "
and just like that , i went from being a woman that these kids would have been trained to see as " disabled " to somebody that had potential that their bodies did n't have yet .
somebody that might even be super - abled .
interesting .
so some of you actually saw me at ted , 11 years ago .
and there 's been a lot of talk about how life - changing this conference is for both speakers and attendees , and i am no exception .
ted literally was the launch pad to the next decade of my life 's exploration .
at the time , the legs i presented were groundbreaking in prosthetics .
i had woven carbon fiber sprinting legs modeled after the hind leg of a cheetah , which you may have seen on stage yesterday .
and also these very life - like , intrinsically painted silicone legs .
so at the time , it was my opportunity to put a call out to innovators outside the traditional medical prosthetic community to come bring their talent to the science and to the art of building legs .
so that we can stop compartmentalizing form , function and aesthetic , and assigning them different values .
well , lucky for me , a lot of people answered that call .
and the journey started , funny enough , with a ted conference attendee -- chee pearlman , who hopefully is in the audience somewhere today .
she was the editor then of a magazine called id , and she gave me a cover story .
this started an incredible journey .
curious encounters were happening to me at the time ; i 'd been accepting numerous invitations to speak on the design of the cheetah legs around the world .
and people would come up to me after the conference , after my talk , men and women .
and the conversation would go something like this , " you know aimee , you 're very attractive .
you do n't look disabled . "
i thought , " well , that 's amazing , because i do n't feel disabled . "
and it really opened my eyes to this conversation that could be explored , about beauty .
what does a beautiful woman have to look like ?
what is a sexy body ?
and interestingly , from an identity standpoint , what does it mean to have a disability ?
i mean , people -- pamela anderson has more prosthetic in her body than i do .
nobody calls her disabled .
so this magazine , through the hands of graphic designer peter saville , went to fashion designer alexander mcqueen , and photographer nick knight , who were also interested in exploring that conversation .
so , three months after ted i found myself on a plane to london , doing my first fashion shoot , which resulted in this cover -- " fashion - able " ?
three months after that , i did my first runway show for alexander mcqueen on a pair of hand - carved wooden legs made from solid ash .
nobody knew -- everyone thought they were wooden boots .
actually , i have them on stage with me : grapevines , magnolias -- truly stunning .
poetry matters .
poetry is what elevates the banal and neglected object to a realm of art .
it can transform the thing that might have made people fearful into something that invites them to look , and look a little longer , and maybe even understand .
i learned this firsthand with my next adventure .
the artist matthew barney , in his film opus called the " the cremaster cycle . "
this is where it really hit home for me -- that my legs could be wearable sculpture .
and even at this point , i started to move away from the need to replicate human - ness as the only aesthetic ideal .
so we made what people lovingly referred to as glass legs even though they 're actually optically clear polyurethane , a.k.a. bowling ball material .
heavy !
then we made these legs that are cast in soil with a potato root system growing in them , and beetroots out the top , and a very lovely brass toe .
that 's a good close - up of that one .
then another character was a half - woman , half - cheetah -- a little homage to my life as an athlete .
14 hours of prosthetic make - up to get into a creature that had articulated paws , claws and a tail that whipped around , like a gecko .
and then another pair of legs we collaborated on were these -- look like jellyfish legs , also polyurethane .
and the only purpose that these legs can serve , outside the context of the film , is to provoke the senses and ignite the imagination .
so whimsy matters .
today , i have over a dozen pair of prosthetic legs that various people have made for me , and with them i have different negotiations of the terrain under my feet , and i can change my height -- i have a variable of five different heights .
today , i 'm 6'1 " .
and i had these legs made a little over a year ago at dorset orthopedic in england and when i brought them home to manhattan , my first night out on the town , i went to a very fancy party .
and a girl was there who has known me for years at my normal 5'8 " .
her mouth dropped open when she saw me , and she went , " but you 're so tall ! "
and i said , " i know . is n't it fun ? "
i mean , it 's a little bit like wearing stilts on stilts , but i have an entirely new relationship to door jams that i never expected i would ever have .
and i was having fun with it .
and she looked at me , and she said , " but , aimee , that 's not fair . "
and the incredible thing was she really meant it .
it 's not fair that you can change your height , as you want it .
and that 's when i knew -- that 's when i knew that the conversation with society has changed profoundly in this last decade .
it is no longer a conversation about overcoming deficiency .
it 's a conversation about augmentation .
it 's a conversation about potential .
a prosthetic limb does n't represent the need to replace loss anymore .
it can stand as a symbol that the wearer has the power to create whatever it is that they want to create in that space .
so people that society once considered to be disabled can now become the architects of their own identities and indeed continue to change those identities by designing their bodies from a place of empowerment .
and what is exciting to me so much right now is that by combining cutting - edge technology -- robotics , bionics -- with the age - old poetry , we are moving closer to understanding our collective humanity .
i think that if we want to discover the full potential in our humanity , we need to celebrate those heartbreaking strengths and those glorious disabilities that we all have .
i think of shakespeare 's shylock : " if you prick us , do we not bleed , and if you tickle us , do we not laugh ? "
it is our humanity , and all the potential within it , that makes us beautiful .
thank you .
