good morning .
happy to see so many fine folks out here and so many smiling faces .
i have a very peculiar background , attitude and approach to the real world because i am a conjurer .
now , i prefer that term over magician , because if i were a magician , that would mean that i use spells and incantations and weird gestures in order to accomplish real magic .
no , i do n't do that ; i 'm a conjurer , who is someone who pretends to be a real magician .
now , how do we go about that sort of thing ?
we depend on the fact that audiences , such as yourselves , will make assumptions .
for example , when i walked up here and i took the microphone from the stand and switched it on , you assumed this was a microphone , which it is not .
as a matter of fact , this is something that about half of you , more than half of you will not be familiar with .
it 's a beard trimmer , you see ?
and it makes a very bad microphone ; i 've tried it many times .
the other assumption that you made -- and this little lesson is to show you that you will make assumptions .
not only that you can , but that you will when they are properly suggested to you .
you believe i 'm looking at you .
wrong . i 'm not looking at you . i ca n't see you .
i know you 're out there , they told me backstage , it 's a full house and such .
i know you 're there because i can hear you , but i ca n't see you because i normally wear glasses .
these are not glasses , these are empty frames .
quite empty frames .
now why would a grown man appear before you wearing empty frames on his face ?
to fool you , ladies and gentlemen , to deceive you , to show that you , too , can make assumptions .
do n't you ever forget that .
now , i have to do something -- first of all , switch to real glasses so i can actually see you , which would probably be a convenience . i do n't know .
i have n't had a good look . well , it 's not that great a convenience .
i have to do something now , which seems a little bit strange for a magician .
but i 'm going to take some medication .
this is a full bottle of calms forte .
i 'll explain that in just a moment .
ignore the instructions , that 's what the government has to put in there to confuse you , i 'm sure .
i will take enough of these . mm.
indeed , the whole container .
thirty - two tablets of calms forte .
now that i 've done that -- i 'll explain it in a moment -- i must tell you that i am an actor .
i 'm an actor who plays a specific part .
i play the part of a magician , a wizard , if you will , a real wizard .
if someone were to appear on this stage in front of me and actually claim to be an ancient prince of denmark named hamlet , you would be insulted and rightly so .
why would a man assume that you would believe something bizarre like this ?
but there exists out there a very large population of people who will tell you that they have psychic , magical powers that they can predict the future , that they can make contact with the deceased .
oh , they also say they will sell you astrology or other fortunetelling methods .
oh , they gladly sell you that , yes .
and they also say that they can give you perpetual motion machines and free energy systems .
they claim to be psychics , or sensitives , whatever they can .
but the one thing that has made a big comeback is this business of speaking with the dead .
now , to my innocent mind , dead implies incapable of communicating .
you might agree with me on that .
but these people , they tend to tell you that not only can they communicate with the dead -- " hi , there " -- but they can hear the dead as well , and they can relay this information back to the living .
i wonder if that 's true .
i do n't think so , because this subculture of people use exactly the same gimmicks that we magicians do , exactly the same -- the same physical methods , the same psychological methods -- and they effectively and profoundly deceive millions of people around the earth , to their detriment .
they deceive these people , costs them a lot of money , cost them a lot of emotional anguish .
billions of dollars are spent every year , all over the globe , on these charlatans .
now , i have two questions i would like to ask these people if i had the opportunity to do so .
first question : if i want to ask them to call up -- because they do hear them through the ear .
they listen to the spirits like this -- i 'm going to ask you to call up the ghost of my grandmother because , when she died , she had the family will , and she secreted it someplace . we do n't know where it is , so we ask granny , " where is the will , granny ? "
what does granny say ? she says , " i 'm in heaven and it 's wonderful .
i 'm here with all my old friends , my deceased friends , and my family and all the puppy dogs and the kittens that i used to have when i was a little girl .
and i love you , and i 'll always be with you .
good bye . "
and she did n't answer the damn question !
where is the will ?
now , she could easily have said , " oh , it 's in the library on the second shelf , behind the encyclopedia , " but she does n't say that . no , she does n't .
she does n't bring any useful information to us .
we paid a lot of money for that information , be we did n't get it .
the second question that i 'd like to ask , rather simple : suppose i ask them to contact the spirit of my deceased father - in - law , as an example .
why do they insist on saying -- remember , they speak into this ear -- why do they say , " my name starts with j or m ? "
is this a hunting game ?
hunting and fishing ? what is it ?
is it 20 questions ? no , it 's more like 120 questions .
but it is a cruel , vicious , absolutely conscienceless -- i 'll be all right , keep your seats -- game that these people play .
and they take advantage of the innocent , the naive , the grieving , the needy people out there .
now , this is a process that is called cold reading .
there 's one fellow out there , van praagh is his name , james van praagh .
he 's one of the big practitioners of this sort of thing .
john edward , sylvia browne and rosemary altea , they are other operators .
there are hundreds of them all over the earth , but in this country , james van praagh is very big .
and what does he do ? he likes to tell you how the deceased got deceased , the people he 's talking to through his ear , you see ?
so what he says is , very often , is like this : he says , " he tells me , he tells me , before he passed , that he had trouble breathing . "
folks , that 's what dying is all about !
you stop breathing , and then you 're dead .
it 's that simple .
and that 's the kind of information they 're going to bring back to you ?
i do n't think so .
now , these people will make guesses , they 'll say things like , " why am i getting electricity ?
he 's saying to me , ' electricity . ' was he an electrician ? " " no. "
" did he ever have an electric razor ? " " no. "
it was a game of hunting questions like this .
this is what they go through .
now , folks often ask us at the james randi educational foundation , they call me , they say , " why are you so concerned about this , mr. randi ?
is n't it just a lot of fun ? "
no , it is not fun . it is a cruel farce .
now , it may bring a certain amount of comfort , but that comfort lasts only about 20 minutes or so .
and then the people look in the mirror , and they say , i just paid a lot of money for that reading .
and what did she say to me ? ' i love you ! ' " they always say that .
they do n't get any information , they do n't get any value for what they spend .
now , sylvia browne is the big operator .
we call her " the talons . "
sylvia browne -- thank you -- sylvia browne is the big operator in this field at this very moment .
now , sylvia browne -- just to show you -- she actually gets 700 dollars for a 20 minute reading over the telephone , she does n't even go there in person , and you have to wait up to two years because she 's booked ahead that amount of time .
you pay by credit card or whatever , and then she will call you sometime in the next two years .
you can tell it 's her . " hello , this is sylvia browne . "
that 's her , you can tell right away .
now , montel williams is an intelligent man .
we all know who he is on television .
he 's well educated , he 's smart , he knows what sylvia browne is doing but he does n't give a damn .
he just does n't care .
because , the bottom line is , the sponsors love it , and he will expose her to television publicity all the time .
now , what does sylvia browne give you for that 700 dollars ?
she gives you the names of your guardian angels , that 's first .
now , without that , how could we possibly function ?
she gives you the names of previous lives , who you were in previous lives .
duh .
it turns out that the women that she gives readings for were all babylonian princesses , or something like that .
and the men were all grecian warriors fighting with agamemnon .
nothing is ever said about a 14 year - old bootblack in the streets of london who died of consumption .
he is n't worth bringing back , obviously .
and the strange thing -- folks , you may have noticed this too .
you see these folks on television -- they never call anybody back from hell .
everyone comes back from heaven , but never from hell .
if they call back any of my friends , they 're not going to ... well , you see the story .
now , sylvia browne is an exception , an exception in one way , because the james randi educational foundation , my foundation , offers a one million dollar prize in negotiable bonds .
very simply won .
all you have to do is prove any paranormal , occult or supernatural event or power of any kind under proper observing conditions .
it 's very easy , win the million dollars .
sylvia browne is an exception in that she 's the only professional psychic in the whole world that has accepted our challenge .
she did this on the " larry king live " show on cnn six and a half years ago .
and we have n't heard from her since . strange .
she said that , first of all , that she did n't know how to contact me .
duh .
a professional psychic who speaks to dead people , she ca n't reach me ?
i 'm alive , you may have noticed .
well , pretty well anyway .
she could n't reach me . now she says she does n't want to reach me because i 'm a godless person .
all the more reason to take the million dollars , would n't you think , sylvia ?
now these people need to be stopped , seriously now .
they need to be stopped because this is a cruel farce .
we get people coming to the foundation all the time .
they 're ruined financially and emotionally because they 've given their money and their faith to these people .
now , i popped some pills earlier .
i have to explain that to you .
homeopathy , let 's find out what that 's all about .
hmm . you 've heard of it .
it 's an alternative form of healing , right ?
homeopathy actually consists -- and that 's what this is .
this is calms forte , 32 caplets of sleeping pills ! i forgot to tell you that .
i just ingested six and a half days worth of sleeping pills .
six and a half days , that certainly is a fatal dose .
it says right on the back here , " in case of overdose , contact your poison control center immediately , " and it gives an 800 number .
keep your seats -- it 's going to be okay .
i do n't really need it because i 've been doing this stunt for audiences all over the world for the last eight or 10 years , taking fatal doses of homeopathic sleeping pills .
why do n't they affect me ?
the answer may surprise you .
what is homeopathy ?
it 's taking a medicine that really works and diluting it down well beyond avogadro 's limit .
diluting it down to the point where there 's none of it left .
now folks , this is not just a metaphor i 'm going to give you now , it 's true .
it 's exactly equivalent to taking one 325 milligram aspirin tablet , throwing it into the middle of lake tahoe , and then stirring it up , obviously with a very big stick , and waiting two years or so until the solution is homogeneous .
then , when you get a headache , you take a sip of this water , and -- voila ! -- it is gone .
now that is true . that is what homeopathy is all about .
and another claim that they make -- you 'll love this one -- the more dilute the medicine is , they say , the more powerful it is .
now wait a minute , we heard about a guy in florida .
the poor man , he was on homeopathic medicine .
he died of an overdose .
he forgot to take his pill .
work on it . work on it .
it 's a ridiculous thing . it is absolutely ridiculous .
i do n't know what we 're doing , believing in all this nonsense over all these years .
now , let me tell you , the james randi educational foundation is waving this very big carrot , but i must say , the fact that nobody has taken us up on this offer does n't mean that the powers do n't exist .
they might , some place out there .
maybe these people are just independently wealthy .
well , with sylvia browne i would think so .
you know , 700 dollars for a 20 minute reading over the telephone -- that 's more than lawyers make !
i mean that 's a fabulous amount of money .
these people do n't need the million dollars perhaps , but would n't you think they 'd like to take it just to make me look silly ?
just to get rid of this godless person out there that sylvia browne talks about all the time ?
i think that something needs to be done about this .
we really would love to have suggestions from you folks on how to contact federal , state and local authorities to get them to do something .
if you find out -- now i understand .
we 've seen people , even today , speaking to us about aids epidemics and starving kids around the world and impure water supplies that people have to suffer with .
those are very important , critically important to us .
and we must do something about those problems .
but at the same time , as arthur c. clarke said , the rotting of the human mind , the business of believing in the paranormal and the occult and the supernatural -- all of this total nonsense , this medieval thinking -- i think something should be done about that , and it all lies in education .
largely , it 's the media who are to blame for this sort of thing .
they shamelessly promote all kinds of nonsense of this sort because it pleases the sponsors .
it 's the bottom line , the dollar line .
that 's what they 're looking at .
we really must do something about this .
i 'm willing to take your suggestions , and i 'm willing to have you tune in to our webpage .
it 's www.randi.org .
go in there and look at the archives , and you will begin to understand much more of what i 've been talking about today .
you will see the records that we have .
there 's nothing like sitting in that library and having a family appear there and say that mum gave away all the family fortune .
she cashed in the cds , she gave away the stocks and the certificates .
that 's really sad to hear , and it has n't helped them one bit , has n't solved any of their problems .
yes , there could be a rotting of the american mind , and of the minds all the way around the earth , if we do n't start to think sensibly about these things .
now , we 've offered this carrot , as i say , we 've dangled the carrot .
we 're waiting for the psychics to come forth and snap at it .
oh , we get lots of them , hundreds of them every year come by .
these are dowsers and people who think that they can talk to the dead as well , but they 're amateurs ; they do n't know how to evaluate their own so - called powers .
the professionals never come near us , except in that case of sylvia browne that i told you about a moment ago .
she did accept and then backed away .
ladies and gentlemen , i 'm james randi , and i 'm waiting .
thank you .
