well when i was asked to do this tedtalk , i was really chuckled , because , you see , my father 's name was ted , and much of my life , especially my musical life , is really a talk that i 'm still having with him , or the part of me that he continues to be .
now ted was a new yorker , an all - around theater guy , and he was a self - taught illustrator and musician .
he did n't read a note , and he was profoundly hearing impaired .
yet , he was my greatest teacher .
because even through the squeaks of his hearing aids , his understanding of music was profound .
and for him , it was n't so much the way the music goes as about what it witnesses and where it can take you .
and he did a painting of this experience , which he called " in the realm of music . "
now ted entered this realm every day by improvising in a sort of tin pan alley style like this .
but he was tough when it came to music .
he said , " there are only two things that matter in music : what and how .
and the thing about classical music , that what and how , it 's inexhaustible . "
that was his passion for the music .
both my parents really loved it .
they did n't know all that much about it , but they gave me the opportunity to discover it together with them .
and i think inspired by that memory , it 's been my desire to try and bring it to as many other people as i can , sort of pass it on through whatever means .
and how people get this music , how it comes into their lives , really fascinates me .
one day in new york , i was on the street and i saw some kids playing baseball between stoops and cars and fire hydrants .
and a tough , slouchy kid got up to bat , and he took a swing and really connected .
and he watched the ball fly for a second , and then he went , " dah dadaratatatah .
brah dada dadadadah . "
and he ran around the bases .
and i thought , go figure .
how did this piece of 18th century austrian aristocratic entertainment turn into the victory crow of this new york kid ?
how was that passed on ? how did he get to hear mozart ?
well when it comes to classical music , there 's an awful lot to pass on , much more than mozart , beethoven or tchiakovsky .
because classical music is an unbroken living tradition that goes back over 1,000 years .
and every one of those years has had something unique and powerful to say to us about what it 's like to be alive .
now the raw material of it , of course , is just the music of everyday life .
it 's all the anthems and dance crazes and ballads and marches .
but what classical music does is to distill all of these musics down , to condense them to their absolute essence , and from that essence create a new language , a language that speaks very lovingly and unflinchingly about who we really are .
it 's a language that 's still evolving .
now over the centuries it grew into the big pieces we always think of , like concertos and symphonies , but even the most ambitious masterpiece can have as its central mission to bring you back to a fragile and personal moment -- like this one from the beethoven violin concerto .
it 's so simple , so evocative .
so many emotions seem to be inside of it .
yet , of course , like all music , it 's essentially not about anything .
it 's just a design of pitches and silence and time .
and the pitches , the notes , as you know , are just vibrations .
they 're locations in the spectrum of sound .
and whether we call them 440 per second , a , or 3,729 , b flat -- trust me , that 's right -- they 're just phenomena .
but the way we react to different combinations of these phenomena is complex and emotional and not totally understood .
and the way we react to them has changed radically over the centuries , as have our preferences for them .
so for example , in the 11th century , people liked pieces that ended like this .
and in the 17th century , it was more like this .
and in the 21st century ...
now your 21st century ears are quite happy with this last chord , even though a while back it would have puzzled or annoyed you or sent some of you running from the room .
and the reason you like it is because you 've inherited , whether you knew it or not , centuries - worth of changes in musical theory , practice and fashion .
and in classical music we can follow these changes very , very accurately because of the music 's powerful silent partner , the way it 's been passed on : notation .
now the impulse to notate , or , more exactly i should say , encode music has been with us for a very long time .
in 200 b.c. , a man named sekulos wrote this song for his departed wife and inscribed it on her gravestone in the notational system of the greeks .
and a thousand years later , this impulse to notate took an entirely different form .
and you can see how this happened in these excerpts from the christmas mass " puer natus est nobis , " " for us is born . "
in the 10th century , little squiggles were used just to indicate the general shape of the tune .
and in the 12th century , a line was drawn , like a musical horizon line , to better pinpoint the pitch 's location .
and then in the 13th century , more lines and new shapes of notes locked in the concept of the tune exactly , and that led to the kind of notation we have today .
well notation not only passed the music on , notating and encoding the music changed its priorities entirely , because it enabled the musicians to imagine music on a much vaster scale .
now inspired moves of improvisation could be recorded , saved , considered , prioritized , made into intricate designs .
and from this moment , classical music became what it most essentially is , a dialogue between the two powerful sides of our nature : instinct and intelligence .
and there began to be a real difference at this point between the art of improvisation and the art of composition .
now an improviser senses and plays the next cool move , but a composer is considering all possible moves , testing them out , prioritizing them out , until he sees how they can form a powerful and coherent design of ultimate and enduring coolness .
now some of the greatest composers , like bach , were combinations of these two things .
bach was like a great improviser with a mind of a chess master .
mozart was the same way .
but every musician strikes a different balance between faith and reason , instinct and intelligence .
and every musical era had different priorities of these things , different things to pass on , different ' whats ' and ' hows ' .
so in the first eight centuries or so of this tradition the big ' what ' was to praise god .
and by the 1400s , music was being written that tried to mirror god 's mind as could be seen in the design of the night sky .
the ' how ' was a style called polyphony , music of many independently moving voices that suggested the way the planets seemed to move in ptolemy 's geocentric universe .
this was truly the music of the spheres .
this is the kind of music that leonardo davinci would have known .
and perhaps its tremendous intellectual perfection and serenity meant that something new had to happen -- a radical new move , which in 1600 is what did happen .
singer : ah , bitter blow !
ah , wicked , cruel fate !
ah , baleful stars !
ah , avaricious heaven !
mtt : this , of course , was the birth of opera , and its development put music on a radical new course .
the what now was not to mirror the mind of god , but to follow the emotion turbulence of man .
and the how was harmony , stacking up the pitches to form chords .
and the chords , it turned out , were capable of representing incredible varieties of emotions .
and the basic chords were the ones we still have with us , the triads , either the major one , which we think is happy , or the minor one , which we perceive as sad .
but what 's the actual difference between these two chords ?
it 's just these two notes in the middle .
it 's either e natural , and 659 vibrations per second , or e flat , at 622 .
so the big difference between human happiness and sadness ?
37 freakin ' vibrations .
so you can see in a system like this there was enormous subtle potential of representing human emotions .
and in fact , as man began to understand more his complex and ambivalent nature , harmony grew more complex to reflect it .
turns out it was capable of expressing emotions beyond the ability of words .
now with all this possibility , classical music really took off .
it 's the time in which the big forms began to arise .
and the effects of technology began to be felt also , because printing put music , the scores , the codebooks of music , into the hands of performers everywhere .
and new and improved instruments made the age of the virtuoso possible .
this is when those big forms arose -- the symphonies , the sonatas , the concertos .
and in these big architectures of time , composers like beethoven could share the insights of a lifetime .
a piece like beethoven 's fifth basically witnessing how it was possible for him to go from sorrow and anger , over the course of a half an hour , step by exacting step of his route , to the moment when he could make it across to joy .
and it turned out the symphony could be used for more complex issues , like gripping ones of culture , such as nationalism or quest for freedom or the frontiers of sensuality .
but whatever direction the music took , one thing until recently was always the same , and that was when the musicians stopped playing , the music stopped .
now this moment so fascinates me .
i find it such a profound one .
what happens when the music stops ?
where does it go ? what 's left ?
what sticks with people in the audience at the end of a performance ?
is it a melody or a rhythm or a mood or an attitude ?
and how might that change their lives ?
to me this is the intimate , personal side of music .
it 's the passing on part . it 's the ' why ' part of it .
and to me that 's the most essential of all .
mostly it 's been a person - to - person thing , a teacher - student , performer - audience thing , and then around 1880 came this new technology that first mechanically then through analogs then digitally created a new and miraculous way of passing things on , albeit an impersonal one .
people could now hear music all the time , even though it was n't necessary for them to play an instrument , read music or even go to concerts .
and technology democratized music by making everything available .
it spearheaded a cultural revolution in which artists like caruso and bessie smith were on the same footing .
and technology pushed composers to tremendous extremes , using computers and synthesizers to create works of intellectually impenetrable complexity beyond the means of performers and audiences .
at the same time technology , by taking over the role that notation had always played , shifted the balance within music between instinct and intelligence way over to the instinctive side .
the culture in which we live now is awash with music of improvisation that 's been sliced , diced , layered and , god knows , distributed and sold .
what 's the long - term effect of this on us or on music ?
nobody knows .
the question remains : what happens when the music stops ?
what sticks with people ?
now that we have unlimited access to music , what does stick with us ?
well let me show you a story of what i mean by " really sticking with us . "
i was visiting a cousin of mine in an old age home , and i spied a very shaky old man making his way across the room on a walker .
he came over to a piano that was there , and he balanced himself and began playing something like this .
and he said something like , " me ... boy ... symphony ... beethoven . "
and i suddenly got it , and i said , " friend , by any chance are you trying to play this ? "
and he said , " yes , yes . i was a little boy .
the symphony : isaac stern , the concerto , i heard it . "
and i thought , my god , how much must this music mean to this man that he would get himself out of his bed , across the room to recover the memory of this music that , after everything else in his life is sloughing away , still means so much to him ?
well , that 's why i take every performance so seriously , why it matters to me so much .
i never know who might be there , who might be absorbing it and what will happen to it in their life .
but now i 'm excited that there 's more chance than ever before possible of sharing this music .
that 's what drives my interest in projects like the tv series " keeping score " with the san francisco symphony that looks at the backstories of music , and working with the young musicians at the new world symphony on projects that explore the potential of the new performing arts centers for both entertainment and education .
and of course , the new world symphony led to the youtube symphony and projects on the internet that reach out to musicians and audiences all over the world .
and the exciting thing is all this is just a prototype .
there 's just a role here for so many people -- teachers , parents , performers -- to be explorers together .
sure , the big events attract a lot of attention , but what really matters is what goes on every single day .
we need your perspectives , your curiosity , your voices .
and it excites me now to meet people who are hikers , chefs , code writers , taxi drivers , people i never would have guessed who loved the music and who are passing it on .
you do n't need to worry about knowing anything .
if you 're curious , if you have a capacity for wonder , if you 're alive , you know all that you need to know .
you can start anywhere . ramble a bit .
follow traces . get lost . be surprised , amused inspired .
all that ' what ' , all that ' how ' is out there waiting for you to discover its ' why ' , to dive in and pass it on .
thank you .
