i 'd like to speak about technology trends , which is something that many of you follow -- but we also follow , for related reasons .
obviously , being a technology magazine , technology trends are something that we write about and need to know about .
but also it 's part of being any monthly magazine -- you live in the future . and we have a long lead - time .
we have to plan issues many months in advance ; we have to guess at what public appetites are going to be six months , nine months down the road . so we 're in the forecasting business .
we also , like a lot of companies , create a product that 's based on technology trends .
in this case , ours is about ideas and information , and , if we 're lucky , some entertainment . but the concept 's quite the same .
and so we have to understand not only why tech 's important , where it 's going , but also , very importantly , when -- the timing is everything .
and it 's interesting , when you look at the predictions made during the peak of the boom in the 1990s , about e-commerce , or internet traffic , or broadband adoption , or internet advertising , they were all right -- they were just wrong in time .
almost every one of those has come true just a few years later .
but the difference of a few years on stock - market valuations is obviously extreme . and that 's why timing is everything .
you 've probably seen something like this before .
this is the classic gartner hype curve , which talks about kind of the trajectory of a technology 's lifespan .
and just for fun , we put a bunch of technologies on it , to show whether they were kind of rising for the first high peak , or whether they were about to crash into the trough of disillusionment , or rise back in the slope of enlightenment , etc.
and this is one way to do technology forecasting : get a sense of where technology is and then anticipate the next upturn .
we tend to do any technology that we think is sufficiently important ; we 'll typically do it twice . once , we want to do it first .
we want to be the first to do it , for the geeks who appreciate that , we 'll catch it right there at the technology - trigger .
you can see in 1997 , we put linux on the cover .
but then it comes back . and sufficiently big technologies are going to hit the mainstream , and they 're going to burst out .
and then it 's time to do it again . last year .
and that 's one way that we try to time technology trends .
i 'd like to talk about a way of thinking about technology trends that i call my " grand unified theory of predicting the future , " but it 's closer to a petite unified theory of predicting the future .
it 's based on the presumption , the observation even , that all important technologies go through four stages in their life -- at least one of the four stages , sometimes all four of the stages .
and at each one of these stages , can be seen as a collision -- a collision with something else -- for example , a critical price - line that changes both the technology and also changes its effect on the world . it 's an inflection point .
and these are the inflection points that tell you what the next chapter in that technology 's life is going to be , and maybe how you can do something about it .
the first is the critical price .
the first stage in a technology 's advance is that it 'll fall below a critical price .
after it falls below a critical price , it will tend , if it 's successful , to rise above a critical mass , a penetration .
many technologies , at that point , displace another technology , and that 's another important point .
and then finally , a lot of technologies commoditize .
towards the end of their life , they become nearly free .
each one of those is an opportunity to do something about it ; it 's an opportunity for the technology to change .
and even if you missed , you know , the first boom of wi - fi -- you know , wi - fi did the critical price , it did the critical mass , but has n't done displacement yet , and has n't done free yet -- there 's still more opportunity in that .
i 'd like to demonstrate what i mean by this by telling the story of the dvd , which is a technology which has done all of these .
the dvd , as you know , was introduced in the mid - 1990s and it was quite expensive . but you can see that by 1998 , it had fallen below 400 dollars , and 400 dollars was a psychological threshold .
and it started to take off . and you can see that the units started to trend up , the hidden inflection point -- it was taking off .
the next thing it hit , a year later , was critical mass. in this case , 20 percent is often a good proxy for critical mass in a household .
and what 's interesting here is that something else took off along with it : home - theater units .
suddenly you have a dvd in the house ; you 've got high - quality digital video ; you have a reason to have a big - screen television ; you have a reason for dolby 5.1 surround - sound .
and maybe you have reasons for starting to connect them , and bring the rest of your entertainment in .
what 's interesting also is -- note that netflix was founded in 1999 .
reed hastings is here . he clearly saw that that was a moment , that was an inflection point that he could do something with .
the next phase it hit was displacement .
you can see around 2001 it finally out - sold the vcr .
and here too , you can see the implications in the world at large .
netflix was right -- the netflix model could capitalize on the dvd in a way that the video - rental stores could n't .
among the dvd 's many assets is that it 's very small ; you can stick it in the mailer and post it cheaply .
that gave an advantage ; that was an implication of the technology 's rise that was n't obvious to everybody .
and then finally , dvds are approaching free .
there 's a company called apex , a no - name chinese firm , who has , several times in the past year , been the number - one dvd seller in america . their average price , for last year , was 48 dollars .
you 're aware of the perhaps apocryphal wal - mart stampede over the 30 - dollar dvd .
but they 're getting very , very cheap , and look at the interesting implication of it . as they get cheaper , the premium brands , the sonys and such , are losing market share , and the no - names , the apexes , are gaining them .
they 're being commodified , and that 's what happens when things go to zero . it 's a tough market out there .
now they 've introduced these four ways of looking at technology , these four stages of technology 's life .
i 'd like to talk about some other technologies out there , just technologies on our radar -- and i 'll use this lens , these four , as a way to kind of tell you where each one of those technologies is in its development .
they 're not necessarily the top - 10 technologies out there -- they 're just examples of technologies that are in each one of these periods .
but i think that the implications of them approaching these crossovers , these intersections , are interesting to think about .
start with gene sequencing .
as you probably know , gene sequencing -- in a large part , because it 's built on computers -- is falling in price at a kind of a moore 's law - like level .
it is now possible -- will be possible , and if craig venter indeed comes today , he may tell you something about this -- to sequence the human genome for 40 million dollars by the end of this year .
that 's as opposed to billions just a few years ago .
you know , our ability to capture the tools of creation is getting closer and closer .
what 's interesting is that at the same time , the number of genes that we 're discovering is rising very quickly .
each one of these genes has potential diagnostic test .
there will come a day when you can have hundreds of thousands of tests done , very cheaply , if you want to know . you can learn about your own mosaic .
here 's another technology that 's approaching a critical price .
this is a fascinating research from who that shows the effect of generic drugs on anti - retroviral drug compounds and cocktails .
in january 2000 , the price was 10,000 dollars , or 27 dollars a day .
the generics came in , first in brazil and elsewhere , and the effect was just dramatic on pricing .
today it 's less than 50 cents a day .
and what 's interesting is if you look at the price elasticity , if you look at the correlation between these two , as the anti - retrovirals come down , the number of people you can treat goes radically up . and the clinton foundation and who believe that they can treat three million people worldwide by 2005 -- two million in sub - saharan africa .
and the falling price of drugs has a lot to do with that .
linux is another good example .
now we 've switched to critical mass.
these are now technologies that are hitting critical mass.
if you look here , here 's linux in red , and it 's hit 20 percent .
interestingly , it 's done a crossover before , but not the crossovers that matter .
the crossover that 's going to matter is the one with the blue .
but you can look and see the direction those lines are going , you can see that at the 20 percent , it 's now taken seriously .
it 's not just for the geeks any more .
that is , i imagine , what people in redmond wake up in the middle of the night thinking about .
another technology that we see all around us out here is hybrid cars .
i do n't know whether anybody has a prius 2004 , but they 're fantastic .
and if you look at the trends here , by about 2008 -- and i do n't think this is a crazy forecast -- they 'll be two percent of auto sales .
two percent is n't 20 percent , but in the car business , which is slow moving , that 's huge ; that 's arrival .
at two percent , you start seeing them on the roads everywhere .
and what 's interesting about the hybrids taking off is you 've now introduced electric motors to the automobile industry .
it 's the first radical change in automobile technology in 100 years .
and once you have electric motors , you can do anything : you can change the structure of the car in any way you want .
you can have regenerative braking ; you can have drive - by - wire ; you can have replaceable body shapes -- it 's a little thing that starts with a hybrid , but it can lead to a whole new era of the car .
voice over ip is something you may have heard something about .
again , it 's kind of coming out of nowhere ; it 's a little hard to use right now .
there 's a company created by the kazaa founders called skype .
look at these numbers . they launched it in august of last year ; they already have nearly four million registered users -- that 's critical mass.
and the same thing 's happening on the carrier side .
you 're looking at ip taking over from some of the traditional telecom standards . this is a tipping point -- if malcolm 's here , forgive me -- and it 's going to change the economics , and the speed , and the players in the industry .
it 's going to look a little bit like that .
and finally , free . free is really , really interesting .
free is something that comes with digital , because the reproduction costs are essentially free . it comes with ip , because it 's such an efficient protocol . it comes with fiber optics , because there 's so much bandwidth .
free is really , you know , the gift of silicon valley to the world .
it 's an economic force ; it 's a technical force .
it 's a deflationary force , if not handled right .
it is abundance , as opposed to scarcity .
free is probably the most interesting thing .
and here you have just the number of songs that can be stored on a hard drive .
you know , there could be a film 's [ unclear ] there , but it 's basically , every song ever made could be stored on 400 dollars worth of storage by 2008 . it takes that entire element , the physical element , of songs off the table .
and you 've seen the numbers .
i mean , you know , the music industry is imploding in front of our very eyes , and hollywood 's worried as well .
they 're facing a force that they have n't faced before .
and their response is draconian , and not necessarily the one that 's going to get them out of this .
and finally , i 'll give you one last example of free -- perhaps the most powerful of all . i mentioned fiber optics -- their abundance tends to make things free .
this is the price of a phone call to india per minute .
and what 's interesting is that it was just 1990 when it was more than two dollars a minute .
india had , still has , a regulated phone system and so did we .
it was surprisingly non - innovative , moved very slowly , but then there was just so much fiber out there , you could n't hold back , and look how quickly the price fell .
it 's seven cents a minute , in many cases .
and the consequence of cheap phone calling , free phone calling , to india , is the pissed - off programmer , is the outsourcing .
it is probably one of the most dramatic shifts in globalization and one of the most powerful economic tools that we 're seeing in our world today .
the force of india , and then china , and any other country that can contact our markets and will work with our companies -- because the communications are free -- is just beginning to be felt .
and i think that 's probably one of the most important technology trends that we 're looking at today .
thank you .
