believe me or not , i come offering a solution to a very important part of this larger problem , with the requisite focus on climate .
and the solution i offer is to the biggest culprit in this massive mistreatment of the earth by humankind , and the resulting decline of the biosphere .
that culprit is business and industry , which happens to be where i have spent the last 52 years since my graduation from georgia tech in 1956 .
as an industrial engineer , cum aspiring and then successful entrepreneur .
after founding my company , interface , from scratch in 1973 , 36 years ago , to produce carpet tiles in america for the business and institution markets , and shepherding it through start - up and survival to prosperity and global dominance in its field , i read paul hawken 's book , " the ecology of commerce , " the summer of 1994 .
in his book , paul charges business and industry as , one , the major culprit in causing the decline of the biosphere , and , two , the only institution that is large enough , and pervasive enough , and powerful enough , to really lead humankind out of this mess .
and by the way he convicted me as a plunderer of the earth .
and i then challenged the people of interface , my company , to lead our company and the entire industrial world to sustainability , which we defined as eventually operating our petroleum - intensive company in such a way as to take from the earth only what can be renewed by the earth , naturally and rapidly -- not another fresh drop of oil -- and to do no harm to the biosphere .
take nothing : do no harm .
i simply said , " if hawken is right and business and industry must lead , who will lead business and industry ?
unless somebody leads , nobody will . "
it 's axiomatic . why not us ?
and thanks to the people of interface , i have become a recovering plunderer .
i once told a fortune magazine writer that someday people like me would go to jail .
and that became the headline of a fortune article .
they went on to describe me as america 's greenest ceo .
from plunderer to recovering plunderer , to america 's greenest ceo in five years -- that , frankly , was a pretty sad commentary on american ceos in 1999 .
asked later in the canadian documentary , " the corporation , " what i meant by the " go to jail " remark , i offered that theft is a crime .
and theft of our children 's future would someday be a crime .
but i realized , for that to be true -- for theft of our children 's future to be a crime -- there must be a clear , demonstrable alternative to the take - make - waste industrial system that so dominates our civilization , and is the major culprit , stealing our children 's future , by digging up the earth and converting it to products that quickly become waste in a landfill or an incinerator -- in short , digging up the earth and converting it to pollution .
according to paul and anne ehrlich and a well - known environmental impact equation , impact -- a bad thing -- is the product of population , affluence and technology .
that is , impact is generated by people , what they consume in their affluence , and how it is produced .
and though the equation is largely subjective , you can perhaps quantify people , and perhaps quantify affluence , but technology is abusive in too many ways to quantify .
so the equation is conceptual .
still it works to help us understand the problem .
so we set out at interface , in 1994 , to create an example : to transform the way we made carpet , a petroleum - intensive product for materials as well as energy , and to transform our technologies so they diminished environmental impact , rather than multiplied it .
paul and anne ehrlich 's environmental impact equation : i is equal to p times a times t : population , affluence and technology .
i wanted interface to rewrite that equation so that it read i equals p times a divided by t.
now , the mathematically - minded will see immediately that t in the numerator increases impact -- a bad thing -- but t in the denominator decreases impact .
so i ask , " what would move t , technology , from the numerator -- call it t 1 -- where it increases impact , to the denominator -- call it t 2 -- where it reduces impact ?
i thought about the characteristics of first industrial revolution , t 1 , as we practiced it at interface , and it had the following characteristics .
extractive : taking raw materials from the earth .
linear : take , make , waste .
powered by fossil fuel - derived energy .
wasteful : abusive and focused on labor productivity .
more carpet per man - hour .
thinking it through , i realized that all those attributes must be changed to move t to the denominator .
in the new industrial revolution extractive must be replaced by renewable ; linear by cyclical ; fossil fuel energy by renewable energy , sunlight ; wasteful by waste - free ; and abusive by benign ; and labor productivity by resource productivity .
and i reasoned that if we could make those transformative changes , and get rid of t 1 altogether , we could reduce our impact to zero , including our impact on the climate .
and that became the interface plan in 1995 , and has been the plan ever since .
we have measured our progress very rigorously .
so i can tell you how far we have come in the ensuing 12 years .
net greenhouse gas emissions down 82 percent in absolute tonnage .
over the same span of time sales have increased by two - thirds and profits have doubled .
so an 82 percent absolute reduction translates into a 90 percent reduction in greenhouse gas intensity relative to sales .
this is the magnitude of the reduction the entire global technosphere must realize by 2050 to avoid catastrophic climate disruption -- so the scientists are telling us .
fossil fuel usage is down 60 percent per unit of production , due to efficiencies in renewables .
the cheapest , most secure barrel of oil there is is the one not used through efficiencies .
water usage is down 75 percent in our worldwide carpet tile business .
down 40 percent in our broadloom carpet business , which we acquired in 1993 right here in california , city of industry , where water is so precious .
renewable or recyclable materials are 25 percent of the total , and growing rapidly .
renewable energy is 27 percent of our total , going for 100 percent .
we have diverted 148 million pounds -- that 's 74,000 tons -- of used carpet from landfills , closing the loop on material flows and post - consumer recycling technologies that did not exist when we started 14 years ago .
those new cyclical technologies have contributed mightily to the fact that we have produced and sold 85 million square yards of climate - neutral carpet meaning no net contribution to global climate disruption in producing the carpet throughout the supply chain , from mine and well head clear to end - of - life reclamation -- independent third - party certified .
we call it cool carpet .
and it has been a powerful marketplace differentiator , increasing sales and profits .
three years ago we launched carpet tile for the home , under the brand flor , misspelled f - l - o - r.
you can point and click today at flor.com and have cool carpet delivered to your front door in five days .
it is practical , and pretty too .
we reckon that we are a bit over halfway to our goal : zero impact , zero footprint .
we 've set 2020 as our target year for zero , for reaching the top , the summit of mount sustainability .
we call this mission zero .
and this is perhaps the most important facet : we have found mission zero to be incredibly good for business .
a better business model , a better way to bigger profits .
here is the business case for sustainability .
from real life experience , costs are down , not up , reflecting some 400 million dollars of avoided costs in pursuit of zero waste -- the first face of mount sustainability .
this has paid all the costs for the transformation of interface .
and this dispels a myth too , this false choice between the environment and the economy .
our products are the best they 've ever been , inspired by design for sustainability , an unexpected wellspring of innovation .
our people are galvanized around this shared higher purpose .
you cannot beat it for attracting the best people and bringing them together .
and the goodwill of the marketplace is astonishing .
no amount of advertising , no clever marketing campaign , at any price , could have produced or created costs , products , people , marketplaces -- what else is there ?
it is a better business model .
and here is our 14 - year record of sales and profits .
there is a dip there , from 2001 to 2003 : a dip when our sales , over a three - year period , were down 17 percent .
but the marketplace was down 36 percent .
we literally gained market share .
we might not have survived that recession but for the advantages of sustainability .
if every business were pursuing interface plans , would that solve all our problems ?
i do n't think so .
i remain troubled by the revised ehrlich equation , i equals p times a divided by t 2 .
that a is a capital a , suggesting that affluence is an end in itself .
but what if we reframed ehrlich further ?
and what if we made a a lowercase ' a , ' suggesting that it is a means to an end , and that end is happiness -- more happiness with less stuff .
you know that would reframe civilization itself -- -- and our whole system of economics , if not for our species , then perhaps for the one that succeeds us : the sustainable species , living on a finite earth , ethically , happily and ecologically in balance with nature and all her natural systems for a thousand generations , or 10,000 generations -- that is to say , into the indefinite future .
but does the earth have to wait for our extinction as a species ?
well maybe so . but i do n't think so .
at interface we really intend to bring this prototypical sustainable , zero - footprint industrial company fully into existence by 2020 .
we can see our way now , clear to the top of that mountain .
and now the challenge is in execution .
and as my good friend and adviser amory lovins says , " if something exists , it must be possible . "
if we can actually do it , it must be possible .
if we , a petro - intensive company can do it , anybody can .
and if anybody can , it follows that everybody can .
hawken fulfilled business and industry , leading humankind away from the abyss because , with continued unchecked decline of the biosphere , a very dear person is at risk here -- frankly , an unacceptable risk .
who is that person ?
not you . not i.
but let me introduce you to the one who is most at risk here .
and i myself met this person in the early days of this mountain climb .
on a tuesday morning in march of 1996 , i was talking to people , as i did at every opportunity back then , bringing them along and often not knowing whether i was connecting .
but about five days later back in atlanta , i received an email from glenn thomas , one of my people in the california meeting .
he was sending me an original poem that he had composed after our tuesday morning together .
and when i read it it was one of the most uplifting moments of my life .
because it told me , by god , one person got it .
here is what glenn wrote . and here is that person , most at risk .
please meet " tomorrow 's child . "
" without a name , an unseen face , and knowing not your time or place , tomorrow 's child , though yet unborn , i met you first last tuesday morn .
a wise friend introduced us two .
and through his sobering point of view i saw a day that you would see , a day for you but not for me .
knowing you has changed my thinking .
for i never had an inkling that perhaps the things i do might someday , somehow threaten you .
tomorrow 's child , my daughter , son , i 'm afraid i 've just begun to think of you and of your good , though always having known i should .
begin , i will .
the way the cost of what i squander , what is lost , if ever i forget that you will someday come and live here too . "
well , every day of my life since , " tomorrow 's child " has spoken to me with one simple but profound message , which i presume to share with you .
we are , each and every one , a part of the web of life .
the continuum of humanity , sure , but in a larger sense , the web of life itself .
and we have a choice to make during our brief , brief visit to this beautiful blue and green living planet : to hurt it or to help it .
for you , it 's your call .
thank you .
